Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus they begin with the teachings of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by its completion one achieves perfection in it, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I should complete for you with this treatise, which is a part of the practical work with hands, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the practical work with hands is prostituted in our region and in our time, entirely deprived, to the point that the science of it is in peril, and its practice is stopped; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which they have mixed with errors and confusion, so that the intentions of it are obscure and its force is elongated and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive it in the ordering of this treatise, according to the method of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and that it comes to the forms of the preparations of cauterization and of the other instruments of the work, as is necessary for the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason for which no artisan is found skilled with their hands in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joining of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and it also requires knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their names, and their functions; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and of the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates said that a name is a word, more in the small work, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, it is not unlikely that they will fall into error, through which men die, as has been seen with many of them, because some are formed in this science and turn away from it and lose their knowledge and their experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor having made an incision into a scrofulous apostema on the neck of a woman, and having cut some arteries of the neck, through which a large amount of blood flowed, until the woman fell dead among his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who ordered that he would swallow a stone of a man which had been processed in his stomach, and the stone was large, and it came out and passed through with a piece of the bladder, for which that man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I suspected that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he went to a wretched black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and with his ignorance, the doctor extracted the fracture, on the wound, with poultices and bandages of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And return the dislocated according to the desires, and return the relaxed, and return the loose one for all joints and command that we dislocate the ligament; and it is thus entered that the thigh and the foot form an abscess, and it comes to a loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And it is called relief for him, and prepared to dislocate the ligament, and obtained is tranquility and thus diminished are his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Greater corruption had already set in the member, because it could not be restrained, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient is in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who made a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated in the same days, until the evil of it was increased by the lord of it to him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This cause is why the bitter humor is pure melancholy, then it does not matter that it comes to him from iron of all, but rather that it be in a member which suffers that all was hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with hand be divided into two deviations: one is an operation to which health is associated, and in work to which danger is in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already exited that place in the entire location of this free one in which operation comes with error and fear; for which it is necessary for you to guard this and let go of that, so that the fools do not approach to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to gain health and laudable success, and leave the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and put away your arms from that which makes you fear, so that it does not decline in your faith and in your name: for many are remaining for your glory, and then established in the world and afterwards to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wailing has already been spoken in some of his mournful words:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad illness poorly, so that bad doctors are not named".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already devoted this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head between the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the sharpening of the cauteries, and with that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning dryness and perforation, and of blisters, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similar things to them, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of treatment of fractures and of similar things to them; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and of the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization by fire and with sharp medicine and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatment of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary to investigate the quality of the juices of that cauterization and of its occurrences, and in what complication it is prohibited to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cauterization and its occurrence is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and for me it suffices to take a little from their discourses, fearing prolivity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization is suitable for every universal complication, whether it be with matter or without matter, except for two complications, which are complications without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complicated and dry matter, it is said that a burning sensation occurs; for some said that cautery is helpful in this case, and others said the opposite, that cautery is not convenient for an illness characterized by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inconvenient to treat a hot and dry illness with something that is itself hot and dry, but rather something moist should be used to heal.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they said that the opposite of that is true, that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find the body of a man to be cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say this from the sermon of that one, who has already experimented with that many times and discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is more fitting that what comes next is that which has already been tried and tested in the chapter on cautery through prior exercise, and having understood the diversity of the complexities of men and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and the accidents that befall them, and the timing of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and moist illnesses, for already all the doctors agree on those, and are not in disagreement about the treatment with cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And it is known, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and of its goodness, so much about medical combustion, is that the fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member of the body except for a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medical combustion reaches to that one in the members where it is joined, and strengthens it so much that it comes into the sick member with difficult healing and it also helps it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not make that except to overflow; And it is already known to us through experiment and length of service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for this I am excused from the length of the sermon; And if it were not that my free will is not read in this passage to you, hidden secret with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion through which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstration, which would be sharp in your thoughts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cautery and consider the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the accident in time is submerged in the benefit of what the cautery attracts, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and constant, which do not tolerate delay so that it is feared that malice will come, which is worse than a small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And I also do not cater to your feet, or, sons, this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that illness which is healed by cautery, not all time is needed, and they pause on that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not known thus by them because, since cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are the causes for which the pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But I prefer cautery over medicine due to the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has come to it through its acquisitions in food and similarities of those causes; unless the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, just as a cautery for tooth pain and similarity to that, it is possible that in it the pain does not return, but rather it happens in a small way.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And most vulgar speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a third option, not because they understand in it, but because they believe that neither medicine nor any other cause justifies the use of cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is to the contrary; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not unless when administering the methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it is useful for that purpose.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And thus it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a difference, as this is not absolutely true, because it has been proven and found that it does not make a difference except in some bodies other than the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire on gold, it is not up to you to declare, because it burns according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it over the flame, the gold melts in the fire, and certain layers are formed through which the artisan can work due to the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for that reason, a cautery iron is made with a fine point and is properly applied with slight pressure to the affected area of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head between the feet, so that I clarify to the inquirer what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On the cautery for headache caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is beneficial for the humidity and cold that affects the servant's accidental condition, of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of sweating and an abundance of rheumatic flux, called corrissa, from the head to the joints and ears, and an abundance of sleep, and of pain in the teeth and throat, and universally of all ailments that come from cold, such as paralysis, swooning, and apoplexy, and similar things in those ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is this: first, we command the patient to evacuate with a laxative medicine, cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the ailment and the age of the patient and their habit require.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then we command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that incision between the thighs on a heated bench and place his hands on his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then stop the flow of your palm near the sole of the foot on the flow of the nose between the ankles.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Greater emperor, when the vein that runs through the middle of the place is perforated, touch that place with a probe, and apply the olive-tree cautery to it, which is the form of this treatment.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then stop that on the location with a gentle touch, in a way that descends, so that the vein is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and examine the location, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered to some amount of the head, like the amount of a grain of barley, then lift your hand, and if it doesn't return to its place, or if another one does, if it is chilled, until what was said to you is seen by the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the location and apply it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then stop it on the cloth dipped in vinegar and apply it to him until the scar of the wound is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the location with four-part ointment until it is healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that as the wound in the arm grows larger, so much better does the arm become, because it is more youthful and improves.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said that among them, the knee should be cauterized within the bone, and a cautery should be held within it until some part of the bone's marrow is released.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what has been adjusted to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They said that others with the cautery should penetrate to the back, until it strongly impresses on the bone so that the bone breaks, and this is the method of minor surgery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the open wound be held for a long time, and then let it be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two species of cauteries have not been seen, except in some men according to the way of fear; and I say, it is better for me, healthier is with salt, what it is; because the head is revealed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is the safest and best, it seems to me; and from that usage and with that work, comes health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter according to.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain and it is prolonged in the patient, and uses treatments with poultices and bandages and medicated plasters and remedies and potions and ointments and gargles and similarities, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that we recount and does not alleviate the suffering of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and absorbs much cold, then cauterize with another cautery, leaving that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the horn of the sick head with a cautery within which the cord is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and let it be uncovered by the bone the quantity that we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cautery in the posterior part of the head, in the place which is called "vas" — and this is the place where the windy humour is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand thus, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will absorb much diverse pain different from the pain of all the other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than the one with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Head of the bed.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of non-ancient migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the part of the head or it is a stubborn pain within the belly, let it be evacuated with medicines that clean the head, and let another cure be administered, which was mentioned in the chapters on illnesses; and not to prolong it, cauterization is done in two ways: either with sharp medicine that burns, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The best cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a cauldron of salt, and pour it out and bind the extremities of the patient on both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp needle so that it is in the patient's bad blood, and let the blood be evacuated, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then put a bandage on the wound to stop the strong constriction, and leave it there for three hours; and then remove it and wash the wound with salt water, and leave the plaster on for two or three days; and then apply a poultice soaked in vinegar until the place forms a scab.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see that certain medicines burn, which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	More, the cauterization is done with iron following this method:  Ignition for cauterization of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called nail hammer, because the head of it is like the form of a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And put the pause on the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is underneath is not injured — and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is injured by the sharpness of the cauterization is as much as the size of it, and raise your hand so that the artery which is underneath is not injured, so that no flow of blood comes.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And put the cloth soaked in salt water and place that on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then put a clean bandage, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize at the extremity of the shoulder blade according to the cauterization, and beware of the incision of the artery in this proper non-ancient migration.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with what we have said about previous treatments, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that is not enough what we have said about the first cauterization or medicine or cauterization by fire, then it is necessary that you apply the cauterized iron where it is whitened, because it signifies on the place of pain along the line of length from which is the greatest pain, or where that is; and place your hand for a guide and hold it firmly while you cut with the iron and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard the continuity of the jaw, which is gnawn by chewing, and that the ligament not be torn and the nerve which moves it, and that spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for he who ignores what he does and is not careful and is imprudent; thus he should not begin the operation on him.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come with the memory of the treatment of the flow of bloody flux from the accident of the spleen, according to its proper procedure, in the said place of this free one.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this sickness does not suffice with this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on contraction of the spleen with a cautery having two points, and this is a better cauterization and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other treatment that has been spoken of in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery, and this is called a point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And apply the point to the ignition, and let it be carried around the entire ear as if a wheel is turning, or in the circle of each one of them if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along the edge with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, then you will feel the place with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of twelve points on the entire ear, and which one, then carefully cure the places within that are sick.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of the tortoise or about the cauterization of a hardened area, more likely it
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tortoise, which is cured with cauterization, and not just of the species that come from flow or flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that proceeds from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of tortoise with jealousy and bitter envy and stubbornness, and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first one on the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply the cautery for the opposite of the affected part, because softening is not seen except in the healthy part that appears.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the aforementioned thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the measure of the species of the codena is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a specialty of the surgeon, the shape of which is described in detail.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Maybe an emperor's hand is more subtle, but that one has a little of what is cut from the excess fat on it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the area with what is described as a proven remedy to bring about a cure.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When old apoplexy is treated and healed with what we have said and it does not respond to your medication and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the handling of the cautery is done according to what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and this is more painful; and then it is healed with what brings about a cure.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion caused by weakness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is advisable that the patient be given at the beginning large doses and pills to purge.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then gently take the patient's head and place it on the block of wood, an plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And let some heated irons be applied, for that is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order which has already been stated.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if health is restored by this; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of the head, which should be dependent on the upper part of the head and the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And leave the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and carefully treat the cautery with that which has been previously prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you have more experience and the patient is tolerant of this, then apply cautery to the middle place; and if you are more experienced, then cauterize the area above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Carefully treat that which is inside until it heals; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	As you proceed with the purification of the head with earth and with that which we have said; and take the patient's head, and apply cautery to it in the middle place of the head, and with cautery above all the horns of the head, and with cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body due to excessive heat and the illness is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and immediately apply the cautery until it is combusted by the cotton cloth of them, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that until it is healed, and this should be cauterized with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter ten.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the epileptic who is cauterized, but rather the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore we advise that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with another cure, which we have mentioned in the division when the illness is great and the exception of medicines is tolerated.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargling and chewing servants to modify the service, giving this for many days, with improvement of the victuals.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the occipital bone of them, and on each horn of the head it should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with those cauteries that have been mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive oil be cauterized as it was previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cauterization in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize them with those cauteries that we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluity that inclines to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them a drink that purifies their brain according to what has been stated previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And rub the head of the patient, and make a poultice decently made from them around the circle, and apply it in the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let them be held firmly on all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply a liniment; and it is also worthy to anoint the eyelids with old ointment.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that on the fire with tempered heat by measure, which the said sufferer feels most in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle place of the head of it in a circle, and release it inside so that it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Make that to the patient for a whole week, with another regimen entering so that it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to the size of it, provided you hold the hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that to the affected part wrapped in cloth or in poultices of clay.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending into the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it has been declared the beginning of water in the vein through the signs which you have heard told in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which cleanses the head of it, and keep it from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make it sweat in a bath for ten days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command it to shave its head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in two veins, or on one side if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that supply the kidney; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop them with some medicine, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution with flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases, it is cauterized on the neck where two bones are, with two cauteries applied backwards to produce.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and assiduously and through the veins and arteries which are in the visible place of the head before and it is verified that this is caused by superfluous and cold phlegm, then cauterize it with a cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you indicate a need for cauterization, then cauterize that entire area of the skin on the external part of the eyebrow above the eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of foul-smelling nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not press your treatment, then prepare it and give to drink to the patient the decoctions for three nights; and shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a medium cautery or an olive tree cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a carnation cautery or two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving a small amount of hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the acidity that you do not irritate it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the carnation cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire division, and let them be extended to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is irritated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted to the inner parts and it affects the entire eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eye is converted to the inner parts and it thus affects the entire eye, cautery in those cases is done in two ways, either with iron or with medicinal applications.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you are going to cauterize it with fire, instruct the patient beforehand that they should lift their skin like those who are cleaning them, until they are stretched and loosened; and if the pain is too much for them to bear, then tie the eyes of the one with a bandage so that they are not moved until the skin is healed.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore when they are healed and loosened, then put the head of the patient on your thigh, and place a needle on the eyelid of their eyes with a thread, marked in the shape of a dead man's finger, and let the beginning of the thread be near the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a poultice made from the white of an egg or a softening plaster on the ankle.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply the cautery in the shape that is suitable for it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize on the figure that has been drawn, little by little, in small touches, until the surface of the scab is consumed, which is thus like a dead leaf, entirely and properly fallen off.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Sign of health of the said work is that you see the eyelid of the ankle already being contracted and the skin of it being lifted due to the puncture of the ankle.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and apply on it a bandage until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And treat that wound with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns for some reason, then apply again the cautery on that spot just as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin grows on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and is evened out so that the skin does not touch the ankle.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Put the cauterized medicine on it, this is what is commanded to the patient, that they lift their skin while it is prolonged and enflamed, and then make a poultice in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some soap of congealed and living worm, or that which is called, and then mix those things together, and make a paste with festination so that it is not chilled; and then spread that paste on the paper which is made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and put that on one wound or on both; and put your hands on the wound wrapped in a cloth of wool, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And put the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not on the bad part so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for this biting is to them like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when he will feel the strong biting, then lift the medicine and put it on the elevated finger; then when the biting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as if washed by the constriction of fire or incision, for this is a sign; and if it does not return to the place where the medicine was applied and does not deteriorate until it is inflamed, your operation will be successful and the wound will contract.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then stop on the patient's cot with abiding intent that the cause of the adjustment be eradicated, and treat that which is afflicted with deafening grease or another disease within that needs healing.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, that your operation be guarded with diligent vigilance so that the wheel of medicine does not turn awry, and if the eyelid after several days is softened and some cause of the pills falls into the eye, then redirect your medicine to that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly apply what was done at the beginning, and apply an ointment inside so that it be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mortar of myrrha.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and thus according to that your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of direct treatment will not be hidden from one who has studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method that we have spoken of in the divisions of diseases and do not confuse your treatment, then it is fitting that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head thus on the upper back, and hold the patient's head by some servant between the hands in such a way that it not be moved or agitated with the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then stop putting pus in the wound or in the mucus of the thigh on the heel of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or the quill of a feather, on one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But I prefer that which is burnt is better for the said work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out of it blood and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then operate on it and extract the purulence from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then put on it the cautery which should be well ignited, and give to the patient a hand with which to hold the cautery near the heel at the back of the nose, so that he does not move his hand or disturb the patient, and then put the cautery in the groove of the heel and cauterize.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of applying the cautery you see it enter into the bone, that's good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let it be like that for three days, and then put on it a dressing with a bandage and wrap it with a drying plaster so that it dries out and becomes healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	More days have passed and it is not healed, then pause on the medicine of sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in this chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula, which the experts first described: put it in the place of the fistula and make a hole in it and put a pause on that fissure with a subtle camel hair brush, which is the shape of it: And put in it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the depth of that; and cover what you put on the depth of the patient with cotton soaked in white of egg or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tube through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will fit in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the fracture of the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Some seen ulcers cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore when you treat those fissures with the method that we have told in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cautery knife according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the cavity of it according to the subtlety of the skin.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then put carefully that instrument in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is found an apostema, and then it is broken, and then it is cut, and then a fistula is made, and then you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignited thing in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the ignited iron reaches the bottom of it, and afterwards make one or two openings; and then treat it with the method that we have told about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the blood is separated and it is healthy, that's good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what is described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cauterization of the teeth and the softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loose, and you cure them with medicines and not with confectures, then place the head of the patient on your thigh, and take the cautery in the shape that will be described later, so that you place the swab on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery, doing it quickly, and make a small incision so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and immediately apply the cautery to several spots according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the loose tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When pain in the tooth is caused by cold or heat, or if there is a wound or swelling, and the cure with medicine is not effective, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a cow's horn or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a iron pot, and then take the cord and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth, and then dip the cord into the boiled horn, and apply it to the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this process several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip a wool or cord in the aforementioned horn's broth, and apply it to the painful tooth, and hold it against a ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the pulp of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Greater caution is required with cauterization by fire, that you pay attention to the size of the opening or hole, and it should be in the core of some grossness and the sharpness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape that is needed, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand on it until the cauterizer cools down; and do this several times a day, either the same day or the next day, until the pain is relieved.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is proper that the patient should hold the mouth of the cautery in their mouth, good and tight, and hold it for an hour, and then clean it; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize to the extent that you see as extreme according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of tumors or growths, (extrophies or excrescences in general
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When tumors are caused by phlegm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion through medicines and you see the digestion of those is weak, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which is shown here, having two extremities covered so that the smoke from one goes out the other, and place this ignited thing on that apostema for a while, and if it is indicated for that tumor, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and leave it for three days and place on it a poultice in good faith until what the fire has burned is re-covered.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with ointments and bandages so that they are healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or of the cautery is suited to such a purpose.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of the throat and narrowing of the passage.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of complexion, then it is known that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the vein at the root of the throat in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not touch the cautery to the throat nor burn much of its tissue except a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the posterior spine of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And his cautery should be done in the same manner as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with what has been previously mentioned so that they are healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of lung disease and of cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity and the patient has no fever nor wasting and it is an old illness, then cauterize that one with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas of the lungs and liver; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, then your cautery should be punctured with the instrument called a point, whose form is used in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points into those places; and then heal it with the aforementioned remedy that is previously inserted where it will be cured.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And you should have the cautery having three points, because cautery is done with this: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery of the titillic which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to causes of lubricating humidity and it is not fixed at the time of its return, you must return its dislocation until it becomes accustomed to returning, and then with a small movement it is displaced so that it ends up, as we have testified, then when we first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is turned over on their back or on their side; and then lift the codena which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery having two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the channel so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will come with five or six cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus the subtle ones according to the quantity of tension; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some adjusted views are suited according to this count and for which there are six cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cautery and cut it with salt, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is to the separated parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a keyed cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there comes in the stomach cold and many humidities so that this extract of its complication is multiplied to it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confirm, then it happens that the patient is on their back resupinated, and extend their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: with one cautery place on the chest for the quantity of a finger with keyed cautery, and with two cauteries place on the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of triangular cautery comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they make a poultice.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be added according to this form, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking the one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you put stitches on the stomach, according to the quantity that you wish with a needle, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery; and then cure that spot with the cure that is mentioned before, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the cold fever.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or thick ventosity, until it is evacuated by normal complexion and purged by excessive excretion, and the illness is treated with what we have said before, but not with confectons, then it is necessary that the illness be sucked on the liver, and stitches are made with a needle, three cauterizings according to this form and quantity, applied on the liver below the hips, where the decubitus of the man can be seen.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the said part, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on the moved cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is administered is equal to the quantity of the mixture of the specimen of the decoction, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already spread their thighs, and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specimen of the whole decoction be administered so that it may reach the entire body and penetrate into the intestines, for the decoction here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of an abscess on the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or swelling appears on the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will suffer gravity and intense pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, where the pain is greatly increased and many times the doctors have exhausted the cure for it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then it is necessary that the patient be turned over on their back; and secure the place of the abscess with a bandage; and apply the cautery which is assembled in a bundle, the shape of which was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery inside which the entire cord is enclosed, until it reaches the spleen, until it penetrates where the blood flows.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one by treatment of the other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that one use this form of cautery unless the one whose study in the art of medicine has been extended, and in many of which illnesses have been cured; but however I have experimented with some occasions and it is arduous to operate, but however I will write what is necessary for us, and it is enough.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient doctors said that the roots of aristology were to be cauterized in this manner: to make a root, take a long and dry root from the roots of aristology, one finger's length, which is found and is of the thickness of a thumb.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and bring it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at the place where the furcula meets the neck; and also apply two small cauteries guiding them slightly towards the part below the beard, and also apply two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the spleen, declining slightly towards the back parts; and also apply another cautery in the middle of the chest; and also above the stomach, and three cauteries to the back parts; and also a cautery at the place between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, leaving the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not think that you will press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be evident in the operation of the tube in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancient doctors said that they used an iron cautery resembling a rod and ignited it, and put it in the place between the ribs, until they reached the aposteme and the sania was forged and ejected, as we have said concerning the aposteme of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for what happens most often is that it occurs in the place of the fistula where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Head of the chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the wound of the illness with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are beneficial, one of which is to make three or four marks according to the length of the wound, according to the shape of the cauteries of the foot, whose figure has been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cauterization the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cauterization be the same method that we have described for the cauterization of the foot, in this manner.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand on the cauterization; and let the patient be elevated above the two seats.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery having two virtues, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the tendon which is in the interior of the wound where the gaze of the patient meets the sinister side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be with which you raise the tendon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two instruments, ignite the wick, in that entrance through which the catheter of the other part penetrates.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see it, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cautery after it has been left to heal for many days, because it is more confident that the other causes previously mentioned in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not applied in dropsy but rather on the affected joint itself.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure dropsy with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the liver, and one cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then place the cautery iron near the opening so that it can be grasped for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment, place the cautery on that which covers so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be fastened with its aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a little nail according to the shape that has been previously described, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous description.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the area that is between the ear-shaped and ankle-shaped parts, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not touch that place; and then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, because the salty water flows out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the end of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the knee and another at the middle spot of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the open wound heal for a long time so that some watery discharge comes out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat the case with those remedies which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of abdominal cavities or Of the cauterization of belly matters.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal cavity is affected by cold and humidity to the point that it weakens the virtues, which are the digestive and retaining virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with various methods of treatment and not contradicted, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of the virtue showing, then cauterize that with a large cauteri on the upper stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cauteris around the subtle navel, with subtle clavicle cauteri; and with cauteri on the alcatin or alozis area with a large one, or with two cauteris.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidities are excessive and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize that on the pubic area and on the intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, which is a perfect cure for youth, of which you should not be ignorant.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 94.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are old hemorrhoids in the nature or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confirm their cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the spine of the back, a little and a little triangular, and with a cautery above the navel for two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it appears that the stomach of the patient is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is often discolored, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the middle of the back with a key-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and carefully treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 95.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the thigh near the abscession of the hernia.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you dissect the thigh, then apply the cautery that is assembled in a row.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited material into the dissected thigh, and place your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a division or incision, where if the humors are excessive, then cauterize each one of them according to what has been recounted, and treat those with the cauterized area that contribute to their healing until they are cured.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more damaging in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the behind, in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the anus does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when someone has a fistula in the anus behind, and it is chronic, corroded blood of it and corrupted humidity, and therefore that which is most worthy to be covered is that which proceeds with a subtle thread, and then determine the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned thread.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery that resembles an arrow.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the thread penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are cauterized one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, beware of all those places; and do not perform that unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrable.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place where it will be healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and its matters are separated from it, and they remain thus for a long time, then know that it is already entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the press of its corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the joints.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the joints there is pain due to cold or great swelling, and thus the coty of the patient is affected, then it is fitting that you cauterize that which is above the joints with a cauterizing iron on each joint with a cauterizing iron, for which one awaits remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen the cauterization with a second small application, for which will come three lined cauterizations, and thus they will serve as more reliable in joining.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize that part with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be shaped like a key according to what is needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix (or uterus).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the matrix, and because of that conception is prohibited, and the menses of it are corrupted, and the flow of them is delayed, and weakness and pain in the womb occur, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; and with a cautery above the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be shaped like a key.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When a moist mucous humor is poured into the area of the ankle, and it causes an imbalance in its joint, and the sign of it is that one thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is found in which way it is bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a circular cautery, because you will have noticed that the swelling is within the circle of the ankle joint, and so that the ankle falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be of the type previously described for use in cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three irons and an olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spiciness of the entire cod, and then take care that what has been cauterized will heal.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said before and it does not work, and that is old, therefore you should treat the patient with gross humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial ones; and then cauterize.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The handling of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with a medicinal cautery that burns, or with a cautery by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific methods, of which one is that it cauterizes the area on the patient's groin with three triangular cauteries in this shape; and do so to a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space that is between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive or grain sized cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often it is seen that the cautery is on the middle place on the head of the ankle for which there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the shape is predetermined for the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, that the circle be continuous and burn the entire thickness of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adhering to the ankle and is not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	More often if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where you encircle the patient who has the pain; and with one cautery on the hip a little below the vertical part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cut, then its depth should be according to the quantity of the spiciness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain has spread to the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that spot with a cautery for three points or four or more if indicated by that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains of pain being on the back of the thigh near the hip, then cauterize that spot with a sharp-pointed cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not touch with the cautery any nerve or large artery, and that by this you do no harm to the patient, either ill occurrence or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have already seen and visited another of those who were cauterized on the hip and ended in cauterization, and the leg became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then there follows a violent purging of the belly, and then comes death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	They say that the wise men in cauterization of any cautery, of which this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, of which the circumference is the size of a palm; and let its orifice be according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another third; and let the space be which is between them the quantity of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those chains be a knot or two knots, and make in that margin of iron decently apparelled with rings; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then put fire near the focus so that it ignites and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize it with three cauterizers arranged in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then plaster it with a poultice and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, sons, of this species of cautery we have made little use because of the fear of the care of it, and because we have found few who take care regarding it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	It is better for the evil to be cauterized where they are suffered, and to apply it to that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	It is better to cauterize with medicinal adhesives that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which there is a iron hook; the length of the bandage on the nausea of them being two knots or four, those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which exists between each of the quantity of the thickness of the said thing; and let them be opened above and below, and let them contain themselves within them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause on the part of the ill person's shoulder, and press your hand on the part of the shoulder; and take hot water and put it between two cloths, and let the quality of that be near the small fire little by little, and apply that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and adjustment of it — for that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all of the area with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and pause on that treatment until the blackness of the adjusted wound is removed, and let it be for several days, and cleanse its purulence; this is the last in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a statue for it that contains water according to what is done in the warm bath.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished lime of both parts one, and grind them and pause in a new bowl of which the part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pour the bottom of one bowl into another enveloping bowl, and throw upon that alkaline and living lime sweet water which takes those in a finger, and once you compress them with your hand for good compression, and release the hole that separates the sharp water from the part in the enveloping bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and throw it on another living lime and other renewed alkaline, because that then will be of very strong sharpness, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for an operation that generates heat.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of the medicines some are those with which it is cauterized, like thus tezizic and honey and lime mixed with soap so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts from one of the ancients the operation and the cure with which is cured pain of water and of vein sciatica, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by a single glance, just as recommended, because the fort holds the bath and already has said that it will go away from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that a certain green herb be taken, and if the green herb is not found, a fresh fig be taken; and the herb be crushed with a few grains and be placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and be tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is warmed up, apply to the ground, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that it's not suitable to use cautery with these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, it is said by Escorides that when the vena stretica vein of the goat is cauterized, relief will be brought to him; and let the cautery be applied in this manner: take a woolen thread and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the metatarsal bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's wool and inflate it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and place it on the thread and burn it until it is constricted.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of the burning reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some times pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as a fall or a blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the infusion of humid and cold matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not applied except in this single case, which is made by the infusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then apply, with evacuation of the patient, warm pills similar to them, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, and in each line seven or eight cauteries, according to the quantity that is seen of the tolerance of the patient and of their virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let a cauterization be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a key-shaped median cautery in this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization for the beginning of paralysis.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times it happens that this illness attacks small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in the children is that they stumble upon their feet, due to lack of elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	We are targeting the uppermost vertebrae in the spine and the nodes of the patient that have begun to protrude beyond the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that part with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery takes hold of the entire affected portion of the vertebra, including the adjacent area.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points made be properly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then carefully treat the area within which it is healed with what we have just said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery should not be administered in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus how gout of cold cause is cured with the hand of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they are alleviated by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize the evacuation on the joint of the foot with a heated iron.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the olive-shaped cautery be the form of it:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains increase in the teeth or other joints, and this hot iron is applied to it, then cauterize each tooth with three irons or four of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed so that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize and do not press your hand too much on the cautery beforehand, but only envelop the vicinity of the coding.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains increase in the tooth and the two, then administer the cautery which we have spoken of in the sixth chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called gout, then prick on the circuit of the ankles thus as they turn, prick on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remains pain in the fingers, then prick on the circuit of the ankles over each knot and over the joint of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if pains push close to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize all of them throughout the entire affected area.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is done and the flux is evacuated with this cautery it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the limbs and intestines are coming out through the wound, and this is what begins to happen nearby, then it is advisable that you order the patient to stop eating for that day and to use soothing remedies so that the wound of their swollen belly may heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to hold their arms inside so that the wound is not touched or the flesh or the intestines protrude.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to the aforementioned place and apply a bandage on the rupture of the bone of the pelvis with signs indicating the extremity, which seems like the majority of circles around the divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery in the shape of this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Into that which is moved by red and yellow bile.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not protrude.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then apply the cautery on that spot with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and insert that into where you have inserted the bone of the instrument into the middle of the thigh; and try again in another way if you did not succeed in the first attempt to insert the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not harm the intestine, lest the patient suffer death or some other great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation is not effective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the place of the cautery for three days with a warm poultice until the scar is formed by the heat.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient sit on their behind for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care that you give the patient nourishment according to the length of time of their treatment, which will cleanse the stomach of the patient, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of vomiting.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to get up, after forty days, administer a moderate and decent enema, and keep the patient in bed for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be spared from work and from excess of food and drink, and from violent vomiting, for when one uses this regimen of complete healing they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell you about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and so on, and do not hesitate, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot cautery according to its quantity, and let that be extracted from the body as the third part of it; and then treat that one with what we have said before, and it will be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said to some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, because it is touched with a probe:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is customary to make a line where the pain is located in the width of the area above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a key-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of the torso.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in some members due to a blow or a violent impact and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then it is advisable to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the size of the cautery should be for each member according to its greatness and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and location of the torso and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and if not, then apply another one to it; for it is customary with these pains that they be punctured in the member near to the one where the pain is, so that it is necessary to repeat the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it has been treated with what we have said in the division and not denied, nor this, and fear for the patient that the corruption will comprehend the entire body of theirs and the entire complexity of it, then cauterize that person on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another at the back of theirs, placing the front to the end of the hair; and two on the horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, put your hand on the cautery a little inside so that it presses on the bone a small impression, and from there will be displaced the organs, so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated for them; and cauterize on the middle as it is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillaries, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the sixth rib; and cauterize that person on all the joints of the limbs and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Watch out for the nerves that are on the sole of the foot so that you don't damage them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some times it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they are helpful and effective; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, unlike their usual state, because the body of the patient is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is fitting that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints, as it is predetermined by the species of the iron instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with flour of dried roses mixed with honey and with another cure, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cauterization of numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or fallen asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with an ointment that will heal it.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some times the area is cauterized where there is numbness which extends to the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and it affects the nervous system which damages that member, and the numbness is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not press on that except for one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the pathway of the nerves throughout the whole moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that cause mortification.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to the remedies of medicine, then you cauterize it with a cautery iron taking a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the code that is inside, until the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with flour of oats and of lentils mixed with rose oil and with leaves of arnagrossa, and with blood of pigeon or blood of dove, each one a portion and all mixed together, and then wrap it in a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the circumference of the affected area as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I say that the wise ones should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not seen as such, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess of feces that cause it, or because of the patient's age, for they are old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hemorrhoids; then cauterize around the circumference with many small cauteries making small punctures; and immediately apply a poultice so that it will accelerate the maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape: and apply it to the middle place of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in that place where it is put, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; then carefully treat that inner part which needs to be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter sign or symbol, possibly indicating a new section or heading
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization of corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a creeping corruption in the member, which corrodes that part like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore if you see that corrosive in a place where the cautery suffers with fire, then you will ignite cauteries of hot irons, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that entire inner part from which the corrosion radiates, and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a dressing with oil mixed so that the scars are all eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains rotten in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	They corrode with certain sharp medications of harsh medicine, for that one is a substitute in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	It's better to apply cautery to the area of pus, to clean it gently.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And already said is the treatment of it with harsh medicine in division, and therefore take that which of it is necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter three.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cautery of the claws and of the other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Moorings or calluses that grow on the divisions of the foot of a sick person which are called claws, and it is a thick, penetrating cause, which afflicts the foot; and cautery for these is done in two ways, that is, cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Better is the cautery with fire, that you should make the cautery iron similar to a pen of vulture, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the claw occupies, and it should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply the ignited instrument on the claw, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in the circumference of the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be for three days before it starts to form a scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made from ground malt and salt to the wound, and leave the plaster on for nine nights, so that it will eradicate the roots of the disease.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the area with an ointment made from generated flesh, until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and warts appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then take a cautery iron and dip it in water, and it is that you take a needle of iron or of stone or of pumice stone, and place it on the clamp; and then put a small amount of hot water in the needle, and hold your hand, and you stir the water with compression of your hand, and be pressing the edge of the needle into the root of the clamp, and introduce the hot water via the pressure of the root of the clamp; and let the patient wait a little for the burning sensation of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, so that the clamp with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the same to the others as well, until you come to those that have grown on all parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those wounds where the roots of the warts have been eradicated with an ointment that generates flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you see that someone has a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to a fever of a similar cause, then it is advisable that you cauterize that person with four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, between each vertebra a cauteri; and a cauteri on their chest, and another on their stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And his trembling will be alleviated and the health of the cold disease will be strengthened.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter Five.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of accidental wounds to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are spotty wounds and there are painful sores which are made of gross corrupt matter; then it is advisable at the beginning of the treatment, that it be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cauteri, or with a rod of myrrh, whose extremity is extended with fire; or with a long razor of erestology; or with a slow-cauterizing cauteri.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some women are cauterized at the beginning of their purification in this manner; and they are not believed, and the excess is broken up, making those healthy, and healing those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Most importantly, we must make sure that evacuation is done with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of accidental bloody flux through an incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Repeated cuts to the artery from which the flux of blood flows, which cuts through the wound that it makes, or through the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and thus it seems, and it is difficult to heal that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to someone, then you should put your hand on the orifice of the artery, and hold it with your fingers, pressing those cut vessels so that the flux of blood is stopped, and does not flow out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply cauteries of olive oil and bandages to the wounds, by name to each wound, and blow on them so that they are not inflamed.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large thread and sew the wound in which the artery is broken, above that vein, firmly placing your fingers so that you have healed it, and apply a cautery so that it is bound and restrained, the blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you heal your fingers and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared on the fire, and thus do not stop doing this with another one until the blood is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not touch the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And be aware that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to restrain the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as I have already mentioned, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the member are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with a ligature for strong structure, or that they be placed on medications whose virtue is to restrain the blood; and be tightened with a poultice or with a bandage.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More properly, he who administers restraint with a ligature or with tightening and with cloth or by position of causes that burn and of similarities, does not confuse but rather applies.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it happens that the patient's condition worsens and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then apply a poultice on the orifice of that vein as we have already said, and understand that due to the great constriction of the inside, the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery do not make an incision; and above the artery sprinkle with cold water of great coldness so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and consider whether it is necessary to use a cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and of evacuations and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already spoken in the first chapter about all the diseases in which a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them; and we have ordered the chapters concerning the subjects from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter with the same medical method, so that it may be of relief to the one seeking it, namely about what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin this, it is fitting, my sons, that you learn that in this chapter is feared what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of this, my son, that it be with great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter many things must be watched, evacuation which is with blood, on which depends life, from the aspiration of the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of the arrow or incision of the foot and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their worst case, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that none of these things fall on you, for some observed cases must show you how to treat men with treated diseases of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is certain that he will escape his illness and flee from death, and also because of the violence of that which he finds in his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is one that gives you to have and to say, you waiting for that health, and his illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not good that you consent to that which comes to you of which this treatment is; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your rashness; and do not presume any cause about this unless certain science which verifies this for you, and to which successful usage follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that which is health converted, for in that you are helped to acquire fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God put in you the gift of understanding and do not lack direction and protection, for that is in your hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows in the chapter of cauterizations, about the cure from head to feet, so that it will be eased for you what you demand and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is retained in the heads of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often happens to infants due to swaddling and when the nurse tightens the infant's head with force.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And it often happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in infants; and to all those whom I have seen it has been fatal, and thus it seems to me that the work is left undone in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was so magnified to the point that it could not hold itself up due to the greatness of its head, but rather the humidity increased until a fatal outcome.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is aggregated between the cartilage and the bone, or is aggregated below the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation on that where the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in width, and let the length of the fissure be two nuts so that the humidity can flow, and this is the shape of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, signal of it is that you see the comedones of the head open on every side and the pus is expelled when you press on it with your hand at the joints and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract the incision completely with all the humidity; and then wrap the fissures with bandages and plasters; and then apply an ointment of wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and hold the head in a steady position; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another manner of incision, that considers when the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of the water, for some evacuations are more in the occipital, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and then attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the replenishment of the water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and divert flows of blood and let the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilassions.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When I find some catarrh or rheum on the shoulders or chest, and it is antiquated, and does not agree with the cure of medicines, then the last cure is in this case the incision of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then be aware when you want to cut those that the patient's vein is near the head, and press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries are visible, and hold the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider feeling the pulse; and the places of each one on the places which are near the ears, are hidden unless in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place a thread on the artery with a needle, and insert each one into the gap of each affected part with a sharp pointed instrument that penetrates into the bone, and this is done for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the instrument into the artery and make an incision at the affected parts with a cutting tool.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers adjusted, because when a vein is cut the blood comes out with pulsating ejection, which is relieved by frequent suction.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then take from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and place a thread with a needle, and go inside the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And this which is taken from the blood is a quantity of twenty units, and take it little by little, and not all at once, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the condition of the patient and from the refilling of the artery of theirs.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then cut it so that a postema abscess does not develop.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with ligaments of cloth of linen, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter three.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the blood vessels which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to some it happens that an old or chronic headache occurs, due to humid and aggravating qualities in the blood vessels of the temples, or a severe and violent pain similar to those, and it is treated with the methods of medical cure and not with those that are not effective, then we have spoken about these ailments, the extraction of the blood vessels in the temples, or cauterization of them, as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of them is that the patient shaves the skin where the blood vessels are in the temples; and understand that the apparent blood vessel in the temple is shown to you by its color, and it's hidden except in few men due to the vehemence of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then let the patient's neck be tightened with some cloth; and apply cold to the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water so that the blood vessel appears to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And scrape the skin with it in a way that facilitates entry to the blood vessel; and put your thumb on top of it and extract it from the upper layers until you extract it from the skin and discover it from the surrounding tunics which were covering it, from the entire thickness.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is delicate, then encircle it at the extremity of the elbow, and make an incision on that one side according to the quantity for which the extremities of the patient are stretched and contracted, and you will not find a flow of blood, because if it is not incised, the blood will not swell entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood for a distance of one to three fingers.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with double thread of hemp or with cords at length, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and a flow of blood will appear.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity that is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery iron within the bone or with a cutting cautery that the extremities of the patient are incised, and it will remain in place of that half-done work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; because cautery is one of those things that help to dry out the humouring liquids, and thus it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then return the extraction of the arteries that fill the area of the ancient wound, and let it be gently placed on the clean dust, and then it is cured with dry medicine that makes the flesh and calf fall off.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you observe another evacuation of blood flow from the artery, then you must restrain that blood, either with a cautery, or by filling the wound area, and hold your hand inside so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then place a cloth on the area so that the blood is congealed, and wet the area with water of vehement coldness so that the acidity is calmed, and it is restrained according to what is suitable.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And this that is put more lightly in the extraction of the artery is that you cauteryze the vein with this cautery having two ends, because you have touched the two areas with a tent, and applied each, a bit of fire, so that they reach the bone and incise the vein in two areas, so that what is between the extremities is elongated, since they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two hips is felt.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	It is better if the sharpness of the two hips is milder, for if they are too pointed and close to each other, the flesh does not heal quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in those areas, the heat of fire is applied to them and the flesh is separated gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this procedure is better than any other procedure and is done gently.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space that is between the two hips be the thickness of the said finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic ulcers of the wheels (or perhaps joints).
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic ulcers, and it is the body of those veins which are on the head, and they do not agree with any cause of medical treatment, and often the face of the patient has already turned red and it seems as if they were walking in a haze, just like someone who walks in a cloud of ants, and the wheels (or joints) of that person are so weakened, humidified to the point that their skin is already inflamed, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of tears, the ancient wise men mixed in the treatment of those of this operation, and I will not name this treatment with a pause.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to raise the skin which is on the upper front, and then make three incisions in the front equally distant according to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length a little bit of the movement of the tears which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared sponge or dry cloth moistened with those which dry out the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between the two acute extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the parting of the temples up to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape out all that cartilage which is between two incisions on the siphac, which is above the bone, and then make a groove from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then draw near this spatula and enter in the first incision another tool which is called a cutting tool, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And push the edge of that sharp tool between the flesh and the tendon, and the edge of it within the bone, and insert this thing so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away all the veins that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More, let the incision be continued to that point where the tendon appears, and then make it in the middle fissure enter into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after that let flow a quantity of blood, squeeze the places of the veins of the congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply to each warm fissure a piece of old cloth, and apply on those powders mixed in wine and oil and sharp wine, and beware that there does not develop a post-cautery abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the dressing and administer a large warm infusion of hot water or broth, and then treat it with a mixture of basilicon and oil and rose oil and other things so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and those descending from the parts of the head to the heels.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the eyes are affected by sharp and continuous cataracts, and the small vessels of the patient's body are extended, and already the sight is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is damaged, and in the forehead there is sharp pain and consequent extenuation, then it seems that this accident is due to the fact that cataracts do not come from humors but from excessive flowing of veins from the affected parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of it, a small one in width (starting from the left temple's fissure to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the bone; and stretch your hand on the sides of the temples which are swollen due to bad chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and fill it between the two lips of the incision with a old cloth or cloths of linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen it with powders made from wine and oil so that the apostema does not become infected with heat.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the apostema is already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until new flesh begins to form, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh grow; just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from this make a plaster and administer it on these wounds for the growth of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral dust or a similar thing to dust, such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant such as cypress or buckthorn, or it is a fluxible thing such as water and sour wine and their similarities, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when dust falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not settle nor grow in the ear, and warm the ear by the sun, and if you shake the dust, then distill it with some oil of violet or sycamine, and then administer the extraction of it, and make it sneeze with condition, and stop the nostrils from the coming of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the divided parts below, because moist warm applications are beneficial for these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not healed, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called the fine gestatory epicicarians, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is warmed with a gestatory, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a small thin onion of double application.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And thus if it is not previously prepared, then make a cane of iron and insert the extremity of the cane into the hole of the ear and close around the environment of the cane with wax and oil mollified so that it does not open except the cane.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with the thumb strongly attracted, for the many things seen with what we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not prepared in this manner, then take of alum or of prepared wax on which the auricles are pressed a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the vein, and then wrap around that gauze decently placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then clear the ear of humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And thus if it is not previously prepared with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should cut to take away the abscessed tumor or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting it is that you at the beginning cut the patient's vein sepulchral and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that flow between your hands and turn the ear towards the divided parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear where the grease of it is in the place being pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the lunar-shaped fissure penetrates to the stone, and the stone is touched, then use an appropriate instrument to treat it; and immediately close the fissure at that hour with speed, and cure it so that it will be healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the fatty growths that swell and become inflamed, then administer the cure and its extraction; but if it does not obey your first treatment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to him the removal of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it is moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in warm compresses, and extract it with small fingers or with a subtle gesture, or with a slight incision as has been said, because the extraction of it is made easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, it happens that the patient uses a sneeze to condition the beginning, and fills his other ear with an old cloth, and puts it on the ear where the water is, and if by this it is forced out, well; and if not, then take hot small stones and lenses according to the length of the said, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient introduce one of these into the hole of his ear and press on the other side of that part with another stone, and push on the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease this remedy until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been expelled, take paper or cotton and insert one end into the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And take more cotton and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been expelled, and squeeze that with a tube just as it is described in the treatment of the diuretic stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of the beast entering into that ear, if it is of small size, take it out thus and similarly; cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size which causes pain to the sense of balance, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and anointings, and the cause of it is considered lighter than all the other causes that happen in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with that which we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confuse your treatment, then beware that you expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle anointings; but if no cause appears, then take a tube, narrow and wide at the end, of which this is the form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and draw strongly with that sucker, make many repeated motions, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If it does not obey your treatment, then stop up and block the circuit of the vein with wax as we have said; then administer the distillations that the ancients have already proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or of bronze, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on the bottom.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then it will be as if they are filling what is in the cavity of the vein, which will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the tube and wrap it in the extremity of the decent member cut, and put oil or juice of some herb, or whatever of these medicines you want in the vein — which is in the ear —, and then insert the tube with its cut end and press with your hand with tempered compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which has been inserted in the ear should already be scratched with a small focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some neglected infants have non-perforated abdominal openings, and this also occurs in some men, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growth in that area; and this obstruction sometimes is made in the forefront of the ear's channel, which does not allow for hearing, and sometimes it is in the partitions of the forehead.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the forefront of it, which does not allow for hearing, is among the major conditions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you achieve hearing, take the ear of the patient to the sunlight and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if you see apparent obstruction, open that area with a subtle spatula, of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it, where the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not, and the spatula being two fingers wide so that it does not make a lesion on the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then apply a subtle and violent insertion so that all the flesh may be removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the cavity of the ear, then take a subtle thread and heat it in a fire for a little while, and insert that into the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have felt an obstruction in the ear that the patient has with difficulty, due to the weight of hearing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice to the ear made of resin according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or that you take cotton and put it in oil and sprinkle it over the wounded place and use it; and if the ear has become apostemated, then take out the cotton and replace it with another cotton which you will have wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the aposteme be cauterized; and apply a cure until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	When there is an excessive flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 3.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of cataracts that have grown onto the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Cataracts that have grown onto the eyelids of the eyes, some whitish growths are moist, others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, hold those in your hands or with a clamp, and cut them at the root with a scalpel, and then apply a dressing to the affected area following the third treatment.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When there is pain with a flow of blood, then cauterize those areas with a subtle, lancet-like cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to make incisions and apply moist dressings that promote healing when any cause of the root remains; and when they are cauterized with a hot instrument, the roots are destroyed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of large growths that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Certain whitish growths develop on the eyelids of the eyes for some reason, which is similar to a cataract in its strength and hardness, and because of this size it is called a grandeyssa.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore the operation on them is what you consider then if the greatness proceeds in it from what appears of the eyelid and is hampered to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision on that part with the width, and return the flesh of the entire part with ease until you evacuate, and lift that part with a clamp and cut that off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the incision is not visible to you, then do not penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, for this will not be noticed in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome the evil for which the anguish of it restores and reincarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness declines to the inner parts of the eyelid, remove the inner surface, then evacuate the eyelid and lift the greatness with a clamp, or you make an incision, and press on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this will not be noticed in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and cure the area with the liquid that promotes healing from within.
Capitol .x.	Capitol seems to be a misspelling of
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment applied to the eyelid near the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a disease which is generated in the tissues of the eyelid, and mainly affects children, aggravating the wounds of those who have it, and causing their eyes to become catarrhous; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears are collected in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, they often rub their eyes with their hands for a long time, and rub them while sleeping; and also the eyelids of their eyes become humid, which has already been covered by inflammation, and an abundance of mucus is apparent in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel mucus inside it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain manner of operation is in that case where the patient holds his head in his hand, and then holds a cloth of linen and wool, and makes a circle according to the quantity that contains the totality of the disease, and then places that on it and presses with the fingers of the entire circumference so that mucus may be collected in the middle of the circle, and then puts it in the middle of that humidity with spittle incident on the fissure by way of latitude, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the press of what you find the entire code that prevails until reaching the extreme archaic, because in the more deposits processed archaic through fissure according to the form of white greasiness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that thing with the help of cloths which you have enveloped between the thighs, to the parts of the foreskin and turn it between the right hand and the left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatulum you do not reach the hollow and you loosen that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, more that you adjust in the fissure a small thing with facility until the archaic is processed; and then extract that thing as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and wine and vinegar and place them on the area and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus apply that you sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that this thing which is a remainder of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	More if there appears on the spot a hot abscess, then cure that with cold plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Head of the hip.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	From the hands of those who touch the womb.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the womb there is born a tumor and the natural skin is wrinkled, then those tumors on the womb cause troubles such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelid and fabric between which that can be a cause of destruction of the womb that is called touching the womb, and it is cured in four ways: either with cautery by fire; or with acute medicine as it will be said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with tubes as I will tell.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then it is good that you place the head of the patient on your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the womb with your left hand, and if it is turned, well; and if not, insert a needle in that part where the faith of the partition is below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread underneath, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the natural skin is — near the skin, and pull the thread to the upper partitions with the eyelid, and turn it to the seam.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then put a suture in the inner partition of the eyelid below the natural skin to the septum, cutting into the larger tear duct and the smaller tear duct; and then pull out the thread and place it under the eyelid with a small piece of cotton or cloth, and sew over the eyelid with a needle, and let it be like the figure of a woman's veil.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	More importantly, consider that the shape is according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because it has already been diversified in men, and it is one of those that indicates that a large quantity has been inserted into the eyelid, according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then return and place the spit on the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near to the natural skin so that it is like the thickness of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then put the hook in one of the two corners of the wound, and scrape out that entire area, and adjust the suture so that the two lips are joined with a thread or fine wire, and remove the blood, and make adhere what superfluous material of the threads is on the eyebrows for some hidden causes, if you want to do this, and if not, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the suture of the threads for three or four days, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound without suture, and cure it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated by the separation of the wound and its aggregation; but suture is better, and thus said the ancients of Tacner.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	More oil is applied on the patient's body, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manipulation in examination, which is to place a figure like a fig leaf on the eyelid, and lift the eyelid with three separated and gathered inches according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do that, to have the inches, and this is not equal, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert one end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the other end of the thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the ties so that the threads are even, and then lift your hand to elevate equally, lift the entire codenna above which is placed as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and heal that inside part so that it is sane.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there occurs an abscess on your incision or your fissure, apply that abscess with wax and to the similar place, with plaster.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some veins appear on the eyelid that the eyes are turned, therefore take care that you use in that of what we have spoken of incision; but suture in each one is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat gout with this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure as described, according to what has been recounted; and then by skill make two canulas or two subtle needles from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatulum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of each separate part, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add subtly under what is overflowing from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canulas of each part with a strong bind, and leave it for some days, because the coding by the constriction will die and will be rejected and will fall out, before it will have fallen by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is prolonged, then cut the bind with the tourniquets, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Thus when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of making two canulas which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of the length and of the width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of pierced skin on the ankle when the skin is hardened.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and the ankles are pierced, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that tender flesh of the spine and liver, and then adjust the extremities of it and massage each one with a very subtle touch.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you combine another subtle thread with it briefly, and massage the extremities of that one if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then put the patient's sick head in its proper place, and let it be near the window so that your work may be illuminated, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the skin that needs to be treated with art, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract what is beneath the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin from underneath and insert it into the scar, and let the skins be one or two or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand towards it so that the skin is pulled out to the scar on the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the elbow is strained and the skin is not broken, strain the elbow with parts of the thigh near the knee, which you have prepared beforehand, until the strain of the elbow is alleviated.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And apply that to the vision of the wound, because then you will strain the elbow and the knee, and wrap each one and close the wound, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its proper place and forms over it a good scar.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then adjust a skin patch of natural skins, and elevate it with that, or let it be until it is lengthened to the proper space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the cure of the disease which appears in the lower eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor consolidation of a wound or of a cut or of a cauterization, and it is called a leporina, and this contraction is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of a wound or of cuts or of cauterizations, or by similarity to other poorly treated ailments.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	During the operation on him, you should make this consolidation and separate his lips, and place between them a piece of cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not attempt to treat him for the causes that dry out and constrict, because if you do it will only make things worse than before and at no time will there be improvement.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for the cause that softens, such as fenugrec, and soak it in water where they are cooked and strained, or a plaster of diaquilon, which should be liquefied with oil, and immerse the piece in it, and heal with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce to the extent that there is nothing left unconsolidated, according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is not but a correction of the prolapse that does not restore the shape of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the cure of prolapse which occurs in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This prolapse that occurs in the eyelid, which is properly called vertadierament prolapse, and it is of him something natural, or something accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Pain from injury is caused by a blow or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread comes out at the two outer extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh to the separated parts with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and insert a ample padding.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus the shape of the eyelid returns to what it was before; if not, take the thread and pass it through the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid back, and make two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremities of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you made so that they meet, and let them form an angle where when they come together a figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then stitch the flesh to the amount that is the edge of the needle, which is next to it, so that it becomes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with a thread of flax; and then treat them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, so that they may be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the eyelid is torn by a tear or suture or cautery, then it is advisable that you sew with a flat needle on the skin of the eyelid, as has been previously stated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between the two lips, as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of the eyelid when it is wounded or injured, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the manner of the eyelid, and this is in the form of diverse small patches.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares a device in whatever manner is possible for it to make the figure return to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for them from the operation and instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidified and attached to the white of the eye, and is prohibited from its ease of movement and natural functions, then it is advisable that you insert the extremity of the instrument under the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it towards the angle.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you gently dissect the subtle adhesion with a blunt instrument, which should not be sharpened by the dissections, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the tissue that does not bother the wound with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your dissection be such that it easily removes the adhesion, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put on the wound salty water in which you have washed it; or dissolve the juice of juniper in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the wound with a warm poultice, and place on the wound a woolen cloth soaked in album of egg, and then for three days use consolidative remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the dissection of the nail and the protrusion of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard subtle callus; or it is not-nervous, similar to a white condensed humidity, which when the iron touches it, or it is forced to take on flesh, it is separated and the flesh is not fixed to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And with both eyes not moving except for the large tear duct which slowly closes and covers the vision and prohibits light and the movement of tears.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The technique of operating on the incision of the eye is that the patient should hold his own head in the tied tie, and return the eyelids to their place, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and return the nail to its joint with little duplication and stretch that to the separated parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert in it a thread of horse or of cow or of sheep, or of silk, or of strong wire, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and put that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie with thread the nail; and stretch that to the separated parts, and extract with the thread from the flesh the tear of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with the thread inside the skin towards the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with little forked instruments, and separate the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by the incision of that there does not develop continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or is attached to the bone, as we have said, and then it should be excavated with a spatula, from which this is the shape of the tumor:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that on the spatula you do not touch the corneal layer and that it goes into the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the wound and put a little of powdered salt or crushed stone, and let it be until the next day; and then treat that with water that is warm, so that it may be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed on the bone, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and is healed in the same way as the others, and recovered, as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to make an incision in it, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle spatula of sharpened iron according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is rarefied and confused and enclosed in the wrinkle, then distill from your work on the wound with crushed stone or with crushed rock or with powdered salt, and cover the wound until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a thread to that area of the operation where everything that is from him has been removed, unless an abscess forms in the wound, for which you will leave that, and treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply your operation to that area with reason where it will be healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The protrusion of the tear-producing flesh, if it does not go back into the wound for great harm, should be suspended with a bandage; and cut that part from that one side, and do not make the incision so that you do not cut the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then pour a cool liquid on the tear duct and make a sign of blessing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a diseased gum and on that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some growths in the wounds of some people have produced red flesh, and it is placed over the pupil, or applied near the eyelids and holds the eyelids together with force to the parted edges of skin and is joined like the skin of a pomegranate.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More often the operation on him is that the patient holds his head in a fixed position; and then cover the wounds of that one and collect all that flesh with a bandage conveniently adapted to it, and hold it with a forceps or with tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and beware of the wound that you do not let it get worse from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be the one with which you cut those things on the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small chisels at the places where it is collected, according to how the shape of the foot will appear in this next chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, fill the hole with triple salt, or distill it into a red powder resembling the one of corrosive medicines, and place on the hole a piece of cotton soaked in warm album to ensure it doesn't become infected with apostema or cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains any cause of the ulcer and it is lorded with a harsh cautery, and you fear apostema or cautery, then clean the hole and treat that apostema with the thing that cures the apostema, and apply it on that one during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do on the adjusted flesh which adheres to the hole of this special case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But above all, take care that you empty the foul hole either by natural way or by accident, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering enough to undergo the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of sweat in the hole.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sweat that comes from veins which are tested on the hole and prevents the movement of the vessel, and they develop the hole over a length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore necessary is at the beginning that you consider if the hole in which sweat is, is strong and in it there is no other illness except sweat, then you collect that sweat.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to put his sick head in his tie, and then suspend those veins with an onion or with two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then the veins be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and extract the blood hour by hour, until those veins are emptied of the hole and are turned inside out.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the hole with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then you pour into the hole clear water or wine so that with its acidity it cuts away what is collected from the sweat.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	More so if it is not possible to collect everything at that hour, then apply a plaster to whatever relieves the patient's pain, and let them rest for several days until the pain is eased and there is assurance against the risk of an ulcer or abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed according to what the doctor orders until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the poultices:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of fractures of the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat a fracture with a cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is described beforehand and it is not healed, then do not put anything in it except for dressing the abscess with its own mucus, and that you extract all humidity that is in it and from the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough scraper, and it should be made of iron, and its head should be round so that it can scrape, which should be made pointed by sharpening with a file or a whetstone for subtle scraping (such as is shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Stop that on the rotten part of the bone, and return it among the ligaments of the toes, and press your hand gently so that you know that the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let some dressings be made, and return to restore the place with drying and astringent remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh born in it and the body is separated from the wound and it suppurates for forty days, and it is not inflamed and not infected and no incident occurs, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in the skill but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you uncover the bone with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take three broths according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the sharpness of the iron be triangular, and its point be first extended to the extremity, as many times as needed.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And stop that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and stretch your hand a little from the well, and return your hand with the broth until it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels by the push that it makes come out as much as where you put your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with medicines that are astringent and drying, such as those that you have extracted.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Thus when the flesh in the affected area is hardened, then the matter that flows from the purulent parts returns to the nose, thus it is easier to put on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the swelling of the ankle.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the ankle swells in its entirety and does not decrease with any remedy or treatment, then it is necessary to bind the patient, and to follow them, and to apply ventoses on the neck with scarification and suction for a good result; and to apply on the ankle an ointment made from katatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and to strengthen the plaster on the ankle with much powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is to take cloths of linen and dip them in a lot of wine, and each cloth should be folded in four layers; make from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the ankle needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then bind over those with a hard cloth and strong strict bandage; and repeat the ventoses with suction and scarification; and then remove the ventoses and elevate the ankle tight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	More often when the ligament is softened, then it is necessary that it be tightly bound.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And return the ligament to its proper place and tie it at day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the joint has already been reduced, well and good, and if not, then apply a plaster with powders and a tightening and a purging enema until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea (or possibly "uveal coat" - referring to a part of the eye).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tunic, and it becomes prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and the shape of the eye is disfigured by that, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea on the lower part in the upper part, and then put another needle which has double the thread of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and pull out the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift up that part of the uvea with the circuit of the needle, and tighten it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and pause over the wound, anointing it with a white mixture of animal product and vinegar, so that the thread can be passed through the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the wound with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And on some wounds apply a poultice made from the entire plant, wrapped in a circle of cloth around the wound, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula to allow the pus to come out, and clear the albugineous humidity, and decrease the wound and enter at the same time.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcer, is not but an injury which appears as descending water, and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	More, the manner of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright chair, and then take their head in your hands from both sides, and turn it so that you see the ulcer coming to the parts below, and then it should be dried and not come down, and the humors should be stopped, and the patient sees the causes thus as they are seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, know that it is a sign of water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent is not prepared for the health with the water that we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle sponge and apply it to the area surrounding the corner where the conjunctiva meets the cornea (in the location of the outer corner), until the secretion is expelled from the eye.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is expelled, you distill it in hot water into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have previously dissolved fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of the descending water of the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is convenient to pierce with serum, then declare that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is good that you make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their eye with a strong bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye with water, if the watery eye is the left one; or your right hand, if the eye is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand to grasp the left, if the wound is on the left; or take your left hand, if the wound is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause at the extremity of the left near the crown due to the thickness of the vein in the white of the wound on the inner tear duct, and then insert the needle to the left with skill and turn your hand to that place.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the wound and feel that the left has already been pierced for a hollow vein.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And take the measurement of the chamber of the left eye to the pupil, the size of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the wound through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause on the left inside the place where is the water, and raise your needle one time, raising another, and so if the water descends immediately, then the patient will see above that which they had previously lost their sight, and also in the following wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; then if the water has descended, you will deposit another deposition before the left one is extracted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And so when it is sick and does not descend, then extract the mucus with ease, and turn that hand little by little, and dissolve in water a small amount of clear gemstone salt, and wash the wound with this solution; and apply to the wound cotton or stopes or wool infused in oil of rose and white of egg, and bind the wound with this oil.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	More of us and those who are from our time put on that wound a poultice made with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your mucus to the entrance of the wound due to its hardness — for there are some men whose wounds are hard to treat —, then take the spatula called albarel, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then perforate that joint, and do not push your hand through the hole, and it is not so that you should make a way to the mucus to subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then introduce the mucus as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And give the complement of your work, let the patient be prepared in a darkened room, made to sleep on their side two pillows, and be prohibited from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And put in the nature of it the water by which its nature is cleaned, and do not move the head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament adapt according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release it from that dark and hidden place and cleanse the foul sight, and make him see some causes, and then return the ligament within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not attempt to do this at the time of cures or unless the infusion is nearby.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Be careful that you administer it in such a way that the water penetrates gently and with great and violent retention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If a warm abscess occurs, then be careful that you release the sore before the seventh day, and correct that which has caused the abscess to burst.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you will absolve the sight of it and place upon its face an orifice through which the evacuation of it is regulated, and it exists in the dark and hidden place for some days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let it be extracted from that place gradually and investigate its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in this case the disciple of vision is not excused from visiting certain times, and then you will be skilled about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some say that fire is made in the Ayraic cave, pierced through which the water flows.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Maybe it seems that nothing like this has been seen in our land, which has perfected this thing, nor is this thing legitimate according to some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this thing is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of diseases for which there exists a remedy for those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of steel properly, and their extremities are thin with this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the healing of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted to which is some cause that is assembled with a scorpion of bad words, or a polypus fish; and this illness is called polypus because it is a resemblance of that fish represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous flesh, of dark color; and from it is that which is not dark-colored flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these non-fraudulent nor cancerous flesh, take care to make the patient sit between your hands and put it in the sun, and warm the nostrils of it, and prick the tendon once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the divided parts of the purulent discharge, and carefully remove what you have understood of those things with subtle spatula of one part into which you know that all the flesh has already been removed; that if there remains some cause of it, then you will scrape it out with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that from its remaining cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	More often if there is bloody or acidic apostume (abscess) on the wound, then stop that which flows; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then touch and cauterize that part until the healthy and sound areas are separated and all the cavities are cleared.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be put into the nose, either vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and its process humidity reaches the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that the dead flesh is nothing in the pus or ulcers of the nostrils, to which the abscess has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore it follows that one should put in the thread of the ligature to which some thickness is, and tie in the word knots, and place between each knot the quantity of the said or mentioned, and induce the patient and insert an extremity of the thread into the nostrils with a catheter or another instrument if possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it is made so that the aura is created, which draws the mucus inward until it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and is excreted through the mouth, because many times the similarity to this action makes the children at school, and it is the lighter cause for one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause at the two extremities of the liver, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a closure of flesh with the nodes that are on the liver, and do it until you know that the flesh is already on the nodes of the liver.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the liver, and pause at the nose with the abstraction of blood a purging, and do it for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, put in the nose a tube of lead for six hours until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	More if you are skilled in cure that you seek, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to make purges, in which are distilled oils and medicines into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or of copper, which should be similar to a small covered lamp, thus as a small funnel, and the middle similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a sealed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument to be purified by the craftsman should be flat and uncovered; on which handle you will hold at the back of it, with which you will pour into it oil or whatever liquid you want from the juices and susceptible causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this purification is precious: take an infusion of castor, white hellebore, ginger, and a bit of saffron, long pepper, saxifraga, and betony spice, one ounce with juice of beets and cabbage, and make into pills, and let one pill be dissolved in warm water, and give it to the patient to gargle while seated.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the ulcers born on the external parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Wart-like ulcers are born on the external parts of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days during which a wart is born, where one reads the treatment of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you should write that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and inherit all that follows.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply a cauterization or medicine that burns, which will be in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider if it has become hard, of dark color and with little sensation, do not touch that part with iron where there is an aposteme of cancer; for many times seen, whoever cuts this aposteme brings great malice upon himself.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a fiery touch and not of dark color, and at times the incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and cut without fear, and treat the area with what is suitable and constrict until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or by similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer successes in that operation except for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you come upon some cause of those, consider if it is a fresh wound with healthy tissue, and then adjust the lips of the wound with suture, and treat it until it becomes healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excavate each part of its underlying flesh until healthy tissue appears.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture and strengthen them, and on them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed vitriol, and apply on the powder a plaster of diafinicon or another consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing for two or three days, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster, and leave it until the wound is scarred, and then heal it with an ointment inside so that the tissues are restored.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Moreover, the technique of the suture is that you add a solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the thread as you do and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of that cause which comes in the two lips in the divided teeth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some wounds are found in the divided teeth of their lips, some of which show symptoms of apostems similar to grass of ears, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you convert the lips and wounds each one of those hardnesses of the whole part, and then the abscess is cleaned, and the place is washed with warm water and vinegar, and the location is treated with that which is stipulated, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter twenty-eight.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Cut the old and putrid gum that is called albulus by the ancients, then take care to suspend or hold the gum with pincers or forceps and incised gum, you must give its root, and let the blood flow or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a poultice on the wounded place, either with astringent or excitant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter twenty-nine.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the root of rotten teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth that are divided, separated, and in the mouth, and between the gums so adjusted, scurvy, cankered, and some old, are blackened and are made citrine or green within, as the gum is seen to be corrupted, and the teeth are loosened.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then take care to seat the patient between your knees and hold their head in a firm place, and rub the teeth where those scurvy and corrupted things appear, which seem like sand within, so that no cause of harm remains, and this makes the blackness and citrinity and other things that are monstrous disappear.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is the stop that is in the beginnings of the reasoning, it is good; and if not, then you will repeat the reasoning on the other day and on the second and on the third day until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have need of various shapes and figures of mortars according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the cutter with which the tooth is cut from the part of the teeth is different from the cutter with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of cutters must be prepared by you, whichever you will see:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter thirty.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delay in the entire eradication of it, because it is not a single cause that would suffice to relieve it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance that comes into play in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, when the patient is about to have that tooth eradicated, you must be firmly certain which tooth is the painful one, because many times the pain deceives the patient and it seems that it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this in the operation of the barbarians.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, once you have certified what the aching tooth is, and what you know to be good, then investigate the circuit of the tooth with spatulum to see if there is any virtue in it, until it is dissolved from the tooth and gum of the entire partition, and apply that with cotton threads or subtle forks little by little until the concretion is extracted.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply a strong ligature with large threads for good retention or strong structure, and hold the patient's head between your teeth so that they do not move, and pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forcibly removed, take one of those instruments, and put it under the tooth on every side with ease and effort to facilitate the removal of the tooth so that it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	More so if the tooth is decayed or corroded, then investigate with a probe to fill in that hole and tighten it at the edge of the root with a subtle thread so that it is not broken in the time of your construction on it while holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And investigate with scrutiny to scrape in the circuit of every part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and rend the partition of it, and return to the patient for the cunning that is more than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their boasting and arrogance regarding the eradication of it, which they do not administer as we have recommended; because many useless things make come upon men with great illnesses, which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of them are all or some of them, or extract that one with some bones of the jaw, just as many useless things we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of it, let the mouth be washed with six or seven sour salts.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an efflux of blood through the mouth, just as many times it happens, then sprinkle a certain quantity of ash and spread it over the wound, and if that ash does not work, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning being of long extraction, short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you have to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them be as many times thick in the handle so that when you grip them with those they are not bent, and let them be short in the extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron, well-made and with extremities, and in the extremities of those let there be teeth which one enters into the other and grips with strong construction, and some of the extremities of those are shaped like the beak of a bird, which is called cicoria, that is, parrot, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is fractured for some reason, then it is good that you apply a poultice on the spot with a bandage for a day or two until the spot becomes softened; and then insert the tips of the tongs, the extremities of which are assembled at the beak of a tool called pincers or forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them should be made pointed like a file or a rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey your efforts with these forceps or pincers, then it is good that you cut around the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called elevator, whose form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be of brief extremity, a little thick, and not sharpened so that it is not fractured.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by this the root is uncovered, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular with extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a subtle pointed extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus helped with this instrument having two edges, from which this is the suitable shape for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled with a large ring, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular pointed extremity, twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be sharpened so that it is not too delicate.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for the teeth are moved in a similar way to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art will find for himself, according to what it means for him, the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases for which the ancients did not devise or even think of a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or the other bones of the mouth are fractured, or shattered, then weigh carefully on that place with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be in the alcune ( likely meaning "hollow" or "cavity") a small, gradually increasing tightness, and let it be held or tied at the mouth so that it does not evacuate or escape until the whole bone is fortified; and then restore the area with medicines convenient for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is small porridge (or pus) in the bone, then take away that porridge and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude beyond the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth protrude not according to their natural body and the form is faulty, and especially when it happens to women, and even more so to venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth has no contact with another tooth, and it's not possible to file or smooth it, then remove that root; but if it's not attached to another tooth, then you cut that one with this instrument, the shape of which is like this; and it should be made from Indian steel of utmost sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision (cut) be the one with which you cut it, for several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be too pointed or sharper than the other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if there is an eminent tooth exposed to the file, then sharpen that one with the iron file from India whose shape this is:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of iron from India and marginally pointed; and let it be with many small points like a file, with which the tooth is sharpened little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is bitten or wounded.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then anoint that end with the ointment, and rub it with the aforementioned razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is loose and the tongue is injured, then it is necessary that you sharpen the edge so that the roughness of that fraction is smoothed and polished, and is flattened so that the tongue does not become lacerated nor the speech corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of gnashed teeth with wire of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth in front a concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated them with medications that tighten, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that they are not worn down by those which are tied with wire of gold and not silver, because silver becomes rotten and soon deteriorates, but gold is never changed in any way.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the thread be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the thread and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and then tie it with two knots of the thread between two molars, or one or more, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then direct the instrument to the area from which you started, and stretch your hand with ease and skill so that it is not injured.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tension be the one with which you pull the thread away from the roots of the teeth that are not extracted.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the superfluous extremities of the thread with the forceps or scissors, and put those aside in each place, gathered up, and hide them between the healthy tooth and the injured tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then release that thread thus stretched like a cord.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loose or broken, pull it or them with another thread in such a manner for all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two injured teeth, thus with these threads tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their proper place in the jaw, and are re-implanted thus as we have recommended, and they regrow.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do this unless you are skilled and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some remedies are prepared from the bones of a cow, and are made into the shape of a tooth, and are placed in the location where the tooth is lacking, and are tightened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter thirty-four.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes with the tongue sometimes is natural to man, or is accidental and happens due to a wound which has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head being held back by you; and lift up their tongue, and carefully cut that nervous ligament according to the width into which the tongue is freed from its restraint.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is some hardness or knot in it, and this has occurred due to consolidation of the wound, then you apply oil and cut it by the width into which you have found the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there isn't a tear in the flesh of the perineum and that you don't cut the artery and come out with a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the edges of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then apply a dressing to protect it, for it is advisable that the patient keep their tongue still in each nostril so that it does not consolidate another passage.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is an excessive flow of blood, apply a bandage to the location; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the area with a broad cautery that suits the case.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a rabid or ulcerated tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some passages of the tongue cause an abscess resembling a small tumor, preventing the tongue from performing its natural operation; and it is so enlarged that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it consists of opening the mouth of the patient, sitting in front of a candle and examining the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, in which the patient has no feeling, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the onion on it, and cut that with a subtle spatula, and cut from the entire affected part; and if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then pause for a moment, so that the blood is restrained, until it is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it with a complement of it, until it is washed with sour wine and salt; and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from both ears and of that which is born in the throat and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I find in the throat a swelling, so there are glands that are assembled together, which are called before ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be until it is matured, and then you will treat that, or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what is thought to be an incision.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it that you consider, during your operation, if the apostema has already been restored with a complete restoration or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then examine the patient in front of the sun, and the head of it should be in the tieu position, and open the mouth of it, and the servant holding between their hands press on the tongue of it with an instrument of noble motion, which is the form of this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or iron, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press on that tongue and the apostema is shown to you, and you see above it the infected vein, then take hold of it and place it in the amenla, and pull it towards the divided parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or when you pull out some cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, with sharp points, which should be made of iron or forged.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your present, then describe that spatula of which this is the shape: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have made an incision, make the other according to this same method of incision, and apply the incision to the patient's wound with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is an efflux of blood, treat with water from the decoction of seeds of milgran or of leaves of myrtle and similar to that for the causes of haemorrhage so that the flow of blood is restrained, and apply a cure so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some abscesses are found in the gum and others on the ears, and incise those according to what was said and dictated in the incision of two similar abscesses.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman for an abscess which had formed on her gum, the abscess was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed her mouth, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have been near death if treatment had been delayed by a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had formed two passages between which the pus flowed out through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut through the fistula and put my finger in one of their holes, and pulled it out, and having drawn out a large portion from it, and then I made an incision to comprehend the other tract, and then I forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I put my finger in the hole into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut out a large part of it, and there did not flow from it much except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the abscess of that woman is resolved, and she began to drink water, and then took a diet, therefore I did not see any need to operate on that abscess anymore for a long time, and another abscess succeeded in its place, which operated between where it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied heat and cauterized the abscess of it, then dried with adhesives; and then I bandaged and did not know that God would do this close to me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a navel when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is a discharge from the navel, and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, then it is called bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	More often when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and not confused with your cure, and also many times that the aposteme cauterized is stopped from them and is subtle, then beware that you write down those that are aggregated around; and if it is to that longitude, and it is sanguine, of dark color or black, and not to their consent, then beware that you hold the incision of them, for in that there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the method that has been said about its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument by which you will shape their form and put the nail in the new moon, and pull it down and write it down with one of two instruments which is mentioned in the incision of two molars.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not write it down unless what is adjusted according to the natural term, for if you write more of them, you will injure their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two molars, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	More often if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, beware that you use art in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you put the head of the patient in the tie, and then press the tongue of them with the instrument that we have said, and then take from the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and apply to this living cause, and put this neither sparse nor subtle, and fill the cavity of the instrument for which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the patient's cavity be where the medicine is placed, as with the cavity of a ulcer or sore, and place the instrument of medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit over the sheet to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one from entering the inside medicine, so that it does not end up in the throat of the patient and so that it descends.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And apply your hand with the medicine, and squeeze that out onto the uvula for half an hour until it becomes disintegrated and seated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the sore, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and introduce the sore into the cloth with a tube to apply until the cloth adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and then leave it so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization is removed from the circuit of the wound with a cloth dipped in butter, and cleanse with what is in the circuit of the patient's medicine, and let it be washed with cold water, and let it be treated beforehand with an embrocation, and anointed with gargling until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is considered safer than incision and less fearful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounds are cured with this water that is more subtle than cautery and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calamine, hyssop, origan, rue, arabic scammony, chamomile, broyde and similar to those of the herbs, and mix all these causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in warm wine, and boiling; and the bowl should be washed decently, and in the middle of the bowl there should be a hole, on which an instrument made of silver or iron is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor goes up to the uvula above the tonsil, until the uvula is much suffocated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply it to those many wounds until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this treatment at the time of the onset of abscesses, because too much would be adjusted in the abscess, and it is not good that you do this, unless you have the declaration of the abscess of the patient's doctor.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If the instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and place a closed hook in the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient is stopped up, because the hook of the cane prohibits bad air from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the throat and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Mucous plugs adhere to the throat or a fishbone or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore see that you extract that which is apparent from those things, on which the sight falls, since you press the tongue with an instrument under the teeth, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because perhaps the cause attached to the throat will be brought out by vomiting; or that the patient swallow a piece of soap or root of licorice or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dry marine sponge and tie it with a thread, and put it firmly in, and make the patient gargle with it, so that when it comes to the place where there are thorns, then they will be brought out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take a needle and it should be tied with a thread, and immediately the thread should be pulled out; or take a lancet and immediately pull out the blood and immediately let it be extracted.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If not, then make a cast of those causes that we have discussed, then use an instrument made of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be made thick so that a small rod fits, and at the extremity of it be hollowed out the part that you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's head upwards, and beware of touching the bone of their throat, so that it does not go into the body and with what you insert, whether it be the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts in with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But when the patient inserts it themselves, it goes more deeply, according to the science of the place of the cause and presses down below, and pulls the hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared in advance, before it is cast.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood coagulated on the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not with confectures, consider then on the throat of the patient the tongue, because you have compressed it with an instrument that you have recommended to them.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore if you treat the bleeding, extract that one with a small instrument or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a curved cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place in the cavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the bleeding is dead and stops from the throat) and withhold water from the patient for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a pitcher full of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this remedy and give them water an hour later with their hand, because the bleeding stops as soon as they feel the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not cured by the remedy that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cypress or with asafoetida through the instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, until the fever subsides.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is that you take a pipe in which are ignited coals and the pipe is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and let the extremity of the instrument be composed in that hole; and give below the fumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the bleeding, because the bleeding subsides as soon as it does.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then you should try the subfumigation with heated vapors, and keep the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty foods and alhes, and don't give them water, and it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which the bloodletting of the throat is treated when it is visible; and it resembles a forceps as many times, except that it has a curvature in its handle:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is applied to the throat, and the extremity of it resembles a beak of a heron, which is hollow, in which is pressed a file, so that when we compress any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many special species, of many kinds, according to which one remembers them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of them by two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses that are in the body itself; and for what we compress regarding humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is suitable for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from one in a joint; and each of them requires judgment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	More of the abscesses are such that they do not need to be punctured, but rather just matured with the application of a plaster or dressing on those.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that need to be punctured when they are severe, and are not matured according to their nature, such as abscesses that are close to the joints, because an abscess that is close to a joint, its being there is prolonged until the purulent matter that is in the circuit of it, and thus the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, which makes a cause for contraction of that member; or it is an abscess close to a principal member, and if you delay the puncturing of it until it is matured, it will harm the principal member; or it is close to the anus, then puncture the one that is not matured; and it is not suitable to puncture the crude, unripe ones, but only the ones that are close to the anus, so that the pressure of it does not push upwards and it is elongated to the parts inside the anus, and a fistula is made, or it is made in the term of it that is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is necessary that you know the time for puncturing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And it is known that it is a good sign when the decrease of pain and the cessation of fever occur, and also the reduction of swelling and of pulse rate, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And beware that you know the perforation can occur in the place where pus has accumulated from the abscess and from pus coming from the purification of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation can be through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, the use of perforation is according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	It is better when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is preferable to delay the perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as we have said; for if you perforate before that, it prolongs the body of the pus and of the muddy matter, and forces the lips of the wound to become hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Most abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or body where necessary, or according to that of which the member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And see that you administer a small perforation, in the large abscesses a large and wide perforation or incision according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses in which it is seen that the tissue is excavated and ulcerated, when it is thus done with a poultice and dressing, in terms that have already been stated, just like that which occurs in cases of dublecs and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three edges; and of those in which the incision is made like the figure of a leaf of mint, like the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More, that one in which there is not a deep abscess, but only superficial ones, see that you perforate it with a superficial perforation, or merely a plane.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And see that when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not worry about extracting all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, and then apply a dressing to the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and apply repeated dressings according to the gradation until it is fully evacuated.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Majorly if the patient is of frail virtue, or a woman with child, or a small infant, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit moves and is resolved with the egress of the blood, and fortifies the morale of the patient, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great caution, and make your perforation in which you perforate these apostems, so that you cleanse the plagues and consider if the plague of the apostem is slight, or is a flat section, then you administer the ointments of garlic or old cot; and if the apostem is large, and the fissures of the perforation are moved, then make sure to apply a dressing in each wound so that they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the apostem a part of the skin is cut off or has been hollowed out in the circuit, then make sure to fill it with old cot or with a thread made from flax or linen cloth, as when you treat wounds or roots, with humidity; and apply this for three days; and afterwards remove it and cure the wound with what is necessary until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is an outflow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in the places where you apply a linen cloth, and place that on the area of the outflowing blood, to stop the flow.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and cure, and sprinkle powders which have been recommended in many places in our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you wrap wool in wine and hot oil, and apply these to the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply wool soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all this should be cold so that it is the third day, as we have said, and it is necessary that you open the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it the cure that is convenient for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know for the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already spoken of all abscesses in whatever manner it is the way of the cure of them by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck small abscesses form, and they are a species of knots that contain tunics which are adherent to them; and the species of them are numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are swellings, and of those that contain humidity resembling slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain humidity resembling dust, and resemble them; and of those that are leprous, harsh.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since you must not make the extraction of those provoke anger or irritation.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you squeeze those with an instrument the shape of which goes near to them, which is called entromes, while you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if that which it contains is humidity, then cut that one with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from line B to line G. Then when the humidity is evacuated, then you excise that which contains the humidity, and do not leave any of that cause of all, for if many times seen returns, if it remains from that same cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the wound in Egyptian paste, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it until another day, for on that which corrodes all that is broken of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply a second and third Egyptian ointment to that wound if it is indicated for the patient, until you are confident that there will be no rupture of any cause of that skin layer; then heal the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you will incise that second in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make an incision in the shape of a cross, and put threads between the two lips of the incision and extract that from the entire affected part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	More so if your skillfulness makes opposition, then do what you know to be recounted as primary.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the abscess of incision and cure according to what you have been told; an incision on a putrid abscess is considered lighter, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are abscesses on the head of some men in whom there is absolutely no humidity; this is why you will not incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and you will touch the abscess as if it were a dull, rough, white stone, which could not be touched, and if anyone were to strike that place, they would injure it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Moreover, in other accidental apostems of the head, this is not the chapter, just as the apostems that come to the heads of infants and should be removed from the roots of the ears, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And make a perforation in those of the lowest part of their chest, so that the body of the blood is alleviated to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then heal those with what is convenient for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofula, which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times seen, these apostems appear in the neck and in the axillae and in the groin; and some seen occur in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, and just as in the nodes and apostema of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, for some of them are lumpy, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that condition, you see good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of what is manifest is proper to the color of the cody, and it is moved to the entire affected part, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, so that you should make an incision on the superficial surface of the upper part of the body to the lower part of the line of .G. between the line of .B., and remove the entire affected part, and stretch two lips of the cody with a forceps or more if needed, as we have said in the apostemas of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is greater caution that the vein or nerve is not cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula be not too sharp, that it does not touch your hand with the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and hinder your operation, then apply to the wound vitriol paste or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and lay on it so that the acidity of the apostema is restrained and the wound is softened and begins to be purged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until the pain is alleviated.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate with your finger if there is any cause for the other small tumors of scrofula, therefore cut out those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then beware that you do not cut out that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beware that you tie that wound with a strong double bandage and that you dress it before it falls into a bad condition.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old fat that you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much pus as so that there is not remaining any excessive matter.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there remains excessive matter due to the size of the scrofula, beware that you intend to cut out the root of it, and extract it, and apply a suture and do what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of what is said to be the worst pus of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then apply administration of perforation, with warm poultices and similarities to those, so that it corrodes the Roma of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then cure it with a poultice of generating flesh so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilum of the accidental apostema inside the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients said this section in the pill, and they didn't see anyone in our land who had made that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men having squint, it is advisable that the extraction of the pill be avoided, since for this reason not all the veins and major ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemas cut in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the cane, it is advisable to use the section of pill to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore it is advisable when we want that, to incise the pill with three circles of the circles of the pill, or four with small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, that the section be in the ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, since it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood from it are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then he should extend the ligature of the ankle with a bandage, and then tie the bandage so that it penetrates to the channel, avoiding the veins of blood if there is some cause for alarm.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then note the ciplach as we have recommended; and it is indicated for the section of the channel by the weakness, which is from that excess that is from its disruption and by the separation of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is reached in which the perforation is feared, bring together the lips of the wound's bandage, and sew only the skin with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow so that it is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is not an exposition, but rather it shows that some of these apostems have already operated on the ankle of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their life is in danger, and some will have to cut the skin so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this command, let the opened wound be such that the evil of the sickness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command you to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that which I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in the gullet of a man, and pierced a part of the vein of the lung, and I was called to his care, and I touched the mucus as one touches that of the dead, and I uncovered the wound and I touched the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I confessed that it had not wounded a vein or tendon, and the coming out was from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And I did not touch the servant if he didn't improve in his health, and after several days he returned to improvement of his conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the removal of a tumor there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of removal regarding an abscess which occurs in the throat, and it is called throat hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called throat hernia, is a large abscess according to the body's condition, and it dies in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It is secondary to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is secondary to two manners of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by arterial swelling, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not suitable to make compression with iron except on the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate it with the aforementioned, and if you find something similar to fatty tumors, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you incise it in the same way as the nodes, and extract it with the fluid that it contains from the skin and flesh; and if not, then it is prescribed a complete treatment, and apply a cure to the area with what is suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the species of knots (or nodes).
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes there are many species and I have already spoken of all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is suitable that I recommend thus the difference between a node and an abscess to remove doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the excess is calmed; and it is a complicated putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	There is no warmth or fever or pain in the thigh, and it contains a cyst that is next to the bladder.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a waist and is made thus as a vacuum, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, which are either fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, depending on how it divides.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you approach the cure of the knot, that you expel and inquire into the beginning with the instrument which is called intromes, according to how its form will be found in the chapter which is proper to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will rotate the threads of the needle with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cyst.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then finally put your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is coming out from the remains of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing humidity is expelled, of whatever color it may be, then you will proceed with drying on the surface according to what has been said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the sediment of the urine there is no humidity, then you will know that it is a fatty substance.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it on the cloth having dried in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as you have been taught, and hang that cloth on a hook, and scratch the outer layer of the entire affected area with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, above it and extract that fluid from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that fluid, and many times it happens that it goes away by itself, and then you extract it gently until no more comes out for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it a flow of some kind, little or much, the knot returns according to the more.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that from it a small part flows, then fill the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and tighten the dressing, and place on it a cauterized plaster, and cure that one with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large knot, then sew the two lips of it and cure it with that which will make it heal.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein is contrary, or not pulsating, then cauterize and fill the place of the third vertebra which is vacant and apply that strict treatment for two days or three until the wound closes and the inflammation of the blood subsides; and then return to separate that which is broken from the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the introducers, and they are of three species, one of which is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introducer is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introducer is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introducer is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, with a handle, and well-crafted extremities, so that they hold the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named probes, and one of them is called a rod.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three kinds, for one of them is large, another is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large probe, its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium probe, its shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small probe, its shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable that they should be used for these abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and tumors, so that between them there are bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made with round, thick, and broad needles, like large pins on which the threads are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are made the experiments of black lead, which agree that by those the fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflected, should be reflected with their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it is of three species, some of which are long, and of the others are medium, and of the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the large experiment with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the medium experiment with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the small experiment with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the tools are of many species, some of which are simple, for which there is only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them are metal tools, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those are tools having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them are ones having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all those things are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple tool, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple tool:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple tool, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a big, painful swelling:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium-sized wound, shape of the wound:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small wound, shape of the wound:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large wound having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium-sized wound having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small wound having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large wound having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a medium-sized wound having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small wound having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and the apostems are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and not placed in such a manner, but rather so that it can be done gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of cutting a vein or a nerve, and for this reason the patient is comforted and finds tranquility, obtaining a little relief which they find from the scraping of the apostem.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ailments, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great pain:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of moderate pain:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of slight pain:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	There are made treatments of iron and they resemble a king's rod with which the liver is treated.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity where the spot is pricked with a hidden spatula and in that course to the divided parts of the teeth and of the flour, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of probes, which are sharpened between the fingers to make a perforation of the abscesses and do not pierce the ailments, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those tools:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vessels with which the flow of blood is diverted, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	There are made instruments of iron, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of vessels be at hand, your large, medium, and small ones, so that through them the flow of blood can be diverted with speed when needed, and then when first aid is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	One does not use these to cut into the entire body, and one only uses them in fleshy areas, such as in the muscles of the thighs and hips, and in the muscles of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groin, resembling other fleshy and humid muscles.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some incisions are made with those small instruments that resemble scissors or forceps, according to this form; through which the blood is let when it is done by phlebotomy, or a cut of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some incisions are made roundly according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that have become similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men have inflated breasts which are a result of excessive sleeping and eating, and thus their breasts become inflated and similar to women's, and they become soft and flabby.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has that, make an incision with a lunar scalpel in this manner, from line B to line G, and then excise the entire thickness, and fill the wound with medicated fleshing ointment, and sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude, so that it approaches the women's, then it should be divided into two lateral parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each of which is contained in the other until the end of each, while the larger line contains the smaller one according to this pattern of the line of B and the line of G. Then extract the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what must be cut due to the restlessness of the patient, and due to an flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and let it be until it corrodes the roughness, and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the thigh or the buttocks.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the thigh or the buttocks are of the species of scrofulas, hard ones, which contain a skin that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity are covered so that they are incised with lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is evacuated from the apostema of the blood, then you complete the cot or viel and send it to the other side.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cot should be stopped and cured with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the apostema is of the species of knots and of scrofula, then you should incise above that thus as we have said in the section about scrofula treatments.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended to such a degree that it becomes putrid, then administer to him a cautery according to what we have previously said.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of apostems that occur by way of the arterial vein or the blood vessel.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, and the vein that is above it is consolidated, then it causes an apostem: And the signs by which it is recognized that inflammation and apostem are through the artery or vein are: for when an apostem is through an artery, it is long and attached to the front of the body; and when you press on the apostem with your fingers, you feel a hissing sound in the vein.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through a vein is the reason for the apparent manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And cutting into this abscess is an error, and especially in those who have ulcers, and in the joints, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is a serious matter, therefore it is advisable that its treatment with iron be avoided, and that which is on the extremities, or on the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is from them due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, incisions in the tube cut into the lung; and immediately after the incision apply ointment with onions and immediately apply the artery, and tear the tunics so that it may be discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And immediately put on that needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to have an injection of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And immediately prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatulum so that the blood comes out as much as is in it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately administer a cure in which is generated pus inside so that the ligaments fall; and immediately heal that with a convenient ointment for it, inside so that it may be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess caused by a cut in the vein, then take care to hold with your hand that which is possible for the abscess on the cord, and then insert the needle in the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be it in the double thread from which you extract the one from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligature as has been said to you in the ligature of the fourth part with two parts on the extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread with the needle so that all of the abscess is covered by the first incision of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut the abscess in its middle place where there is that which comes out of it, then you incise the superfluous part of the cord, and let that which is tied to it remain.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice on it, which has been submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with warm baths and ointments so that it may be healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus when an abscess occurs in the artery and in the vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs from percussion or from excessive labor, and from similar symptoms.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the hands of the patient in the places of the helpers or of the ankle, or in any place where the joints are bent.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the larger parts of the patient's disposition six of them and when it is strait with vehementia, it seems to the patient as a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that collects in the front of the body, and for this reason the coda (or tail) is left, and it is bent to one side and does not go to the parts either before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be covered with iron, for it would make the contraction stronger.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Hands of one who has a wound on the head or on the forehead with spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then take that one with the forceps and cut it out from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate it, and place a dressing on it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter of the hip.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section concerning an abscess which occurs on the thigh that extends to the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	We find in some men certain excrescences grown in the abdomens of those and in other parts of the body of those thighs which are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of that is thick; and already the lips of that are turned outward, and it is of that which is small, and it is of that which is very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the abdomen of him there were two thighs which were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with minimal roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned outward and were splitting, and humidity was flowing from that the whole time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and extracted one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other weighing six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of it is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tumor is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you incise with a broad spatula, and be in your presence cauteries at the focus, for many excrescences must expel the section of him very abundantly; and if you see abundance, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and fearful, beware of excessive iron; but then take a new-made lead plaque, and apply it to that part, the handling of which is what we have already described; and leave it on for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust it in the strictness of the lead wire; thus, do not cease to apply a large amount of lead plaster on the ailment, until it is healed and falls off by itself through its own effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the ailment is of a coarse root, then in its treatment there is some cause for fear and dread, and especially so in one who has it in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you treat the worst of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not attempt to treat the ailment which is of a dark color, of little sensation, and sluggish regard, for that is absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come to the memory of the sick person then with consolation.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter or Head ( possibly "Capitol" is an older
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of the prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Prominence of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and from it the web or intestine comes out as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted fatness in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	More often it is due to the fracture of the spleen and the inflammation of the weave, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and it is a serious pain, and it appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that man with what we have previously mentioned, of great and intense diversity, and when you press on that man with your fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and it is strong with him in this way, and it is magnified by the movement of the bath and the violent exercise.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	More often it is due to humidity, then it is a serpent and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it increase.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with this symptom the abscess appears on the declined blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	More often if it is due to bad flesh, then the abscess is grievous, thick and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	More often if it is due to flatulence, then the touch of it is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the liver, or of vein, or due to flatulence; then be warned that you should be prohibited from the treatment of it, for in that there is fear and anxiety as I have instructed in the chapter in which I have spoken about abscesses due to liver and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the protrusion is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is advisable that the patient hold their own thigh, and stretch out; and place a tent under the entire navel area, and instruct them to stay bent between their thighs over their back, and encircle with a spatula the navel area over the location where you have placed the tent; and extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and place it in the area with a strong or weak thread and the technique of the ligature.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then probe the middle of the abscess, extended over the ligament and insert the finger in that place and feel for the intestine; and if you have not found it or retained it by the ligament, then extract it quickly and push the intestine to the inner parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take it with a hook; and cut away the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into the two strong threads and push two needles through the area you have made around the abscess in a cruciform shape, which should penetrate; and then tie the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and dress the area where the extended flesh protrudes and falls by itself; or cut away what is putrid and rotten, and treat that which comes from the ulcers within until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is from no flesh in it or due to humidity, then it is necessary that you treat the abscess as we have said and remove the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and treat that which comes out and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 3.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already spoken, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid iron treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have spoken of cancer generated in the matrix and caution of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some cancers in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, such as cancer of the breast or thigh and similar things on the limbs, can be extracted entirely, especially when it is just beginning and small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and grave, it is not advisable to touch it, because I have never seen anyone recover from that one, nor have I seen others who have been cured of it, or that it has been overcome.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on them is when it is allocated thus as we have said, it is that you precede and release the patient from black bile purges, and then apply the sagana, if there is an evident and visible repugnance.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which there is a place for the operation, and then anoint the affected area with oils that cover it; and then concave the entire part with a bandage to make a good enclosure so that no cause of the roots of it will be disturbed.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not constrict the vessel, and press the places, and purge the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument, whichever is most convenient of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is opposition to the thick blood of an incision in the vein or artery, then cauterize that place until the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another cure so that it will be healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter five.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not similar to the species of altitudes alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypochondria, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of hydropic tympanites with medicine and have not confirmed your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already obtained debility, or it is with another illness, another hydrops, thus as if it is in the toes or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with excessive vertigo, and it is not another illness but hydrops alone, and neither infant nor old, then the management of the operation is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and minister to them, apply warmth to their belly with your hand, introducing water to the lower part of the abdomen, and apply a warm sponge to the spine in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Be of two sharp parts long, of sharp extremity like a sponge; but however be brief in the alcove, little by little, so that in the operation you do not go into the intestine, and that you touch it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from part of the intestines, for it is known that you have sectioned the navel string to the quantity of three fingers to the partitions of the intestines, on the right side of the patient near the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the bladder, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not suitable that your section be on the rib over which the disease wishes to flow, so that the excesses do not run to that cold place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the instrument through the entire cord, and then insert it into that section, and lift your hand with the spatulum between the cord and the siphach, and you will extract that; if it is the quantity of a fingernail or about.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the siphach so that the spatulum reaches the empty place, which is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gilt iron, on which in the lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is fashioned according to the shape of a feather, thus sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extremity of the pus that is above the arm, when the instrument penetrates to the water, then they put it on the instrument, so it evacuates from the water in the middle amount, because if you evacuate from the same amount that doesn't fit in the hour, perhaps the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or approaches death closely.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Empty it according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and as the disposition of the patient indicates, concerning the virtue of their pulse and the goodness of them.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which is the cause that is retained by the tube, which holds the pipe that is above the siphon, for which it is recommended to you that you perforate in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then insert the instrument to the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do this for several days without fear, and beware of error while not spilling much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you suspect the patient, and a large quantity of water is extracted, then treat them as if they were buried in hot sand, and move them to a bath, and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize on the stomach, and next to the liver approach the extraction of the water, according to what has been recounted in what has been previously stated.
Capitol .lv.	Treat the area near the liver, following established
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the treatment of infants whose urinary openings are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times, in some infants, the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or the passage is narrow or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, we must make an opening for it as soon as it is born with a subtle spatulum according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the hole a thin lead clamp and tie it, and leave it for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it wants to urinate, it should be uncovered and urine should flow; and then the clamp should be returned.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not leave the lead in place, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not close the opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	It is better for the one whose hole is narrow to be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	It is worse for those in whom the hole is not in its place, but rather is situated, which causes it to be one of those born with the hole at the end of the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate properly inside, until they elevate the penis to their mother's parts above; and it is not due to generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should, and it is a very bad malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and incise the head of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as one cuts a feather, or so that you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the vein seems like the head of the penis and the blood flows into the middle place according to what is convenient.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, for many times it happens that this occurs; and be careful with the patient that you are treating, so that you do not cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter Six.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the treatment of what is cut in the prepuce on the head of the penis and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times it happens that this treatment is cut on the penis and it is an excess of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, it is advisable to suspend it with a subtle hook and cut it until it is completely removed; and then apply a poultice of submirgit, an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure it with a diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant, with a black color, then it is advisable that you apply cautery near the incision and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Moreover if the ulcer is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then it is advisable that you remove the ulcer that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and then treat the outside one, because when you treat both at the same time, it is not certain that it will not be complicated.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also amenorrhea and black corruption occur in the genitals and in the prepuce, therefore it is advisable that you conquer all that which is already corrupted and that which wants to corrupt or is already corrupted; and apply a liniment on that area with honey, which is mixed with flour of wheat and of various herbs such as mint and chamomile.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat one with the other treatment until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Moreover if there is an abundance of bloody flux, then administer lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for juvenile cautery is for two purposes at the same time, that is to say, for the flow of blood and for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that time, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in one whose foreskin is its own, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a plague or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from the entire partition.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those things precisely, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula on some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety effortlessly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread, which has been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with a strong styptic until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 48.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of infants and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity problems: but rather it's an operation of our will and intention, and those who undergo it are properly infants, it's necessary that we assign the best operation and path so they lose less health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus I say that the ancients did not recommend circumcision for their free men, because they didn't use it in their laws, and it's not so, but rather we have acquired through experience, which is the cause that has been found by most of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and tongs; and they use ligature with thread and incision with nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already proved all these methods and didn't find better purification with forceps, or ligature with thread than the purification with the nail, because many times the skin escapes from the fingers, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains below, and it is necessary to make another incision and painful surety.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification that is made by the Alpecati, and is digital, which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secure, because the foreskin enters into the wound of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More in the operation of the nail, the iron instrument breaks and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the bowel of the infant is short by nature, and many times seen in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and you have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is done with forces and ligaments of the faith, goodness, experiment reveals to me, because the forces are of proportional incision, for which the acuity that is above is as the acuity that is below; and thus when you press your hand in proportion to the two acuities, and you make an incision according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the faith with a figure containing the bowel of the entire partition, in which no error is made.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the infant stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you should not do but rather you should place the faith in its belly only, and that you should read to it until the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then do this to cheer up in all that manner which is at your possibility, so that it receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then prepare to be between your hands in a prepared station, and do not be careless; and hide the forces in your hand or below the tie of your foot, so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the womb, and pull out what is inside until the head of the fetus is visible, and then cleanse that which is accumulated in the placenta due to rot.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the marked place with a double thread, and bind it below with a small ligature, and take the needle and sew through the wound, holding the place of the ligature well, and cut between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the womb upwards and extract the head of the fetus; and slowly release the blood little by little, for it is better; and sprinkle powder on top and over the powder place a cloth in which has been sprinkled mugwort mixed with oil, rose water, and other concocted remedies; and leave that there until the next day; and treat that with cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the purging medicines, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some are to be extracted without cutting and the others are to be cut, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and the length of the two edges is as sharp as the length of two fingernails together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The greatest mistake in purging is when the internal womb ejects all or part of it outside through the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, I advise that you stretch out your finger during your hour on the affected area and write down this prescription according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a needle and write it down.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More so if three days have passed, and the swelling that is inflamed above the affected thigh has gone down, then you should let out what is accumulated in the abscessed place, and extract it with ease, and write it according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the thigh, because it would not be good for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so treat it with the remedy that consolidates the wound with powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is written on the quota beyond measure, and he obeys the separated parts, this will not be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And more treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by powder or by flesh, and similar to those things that we have said regarding methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention of it in the body due to a stone that is already in the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be seated on a sieve.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that one on the back of another and stretch out the belly of the affected part above the back, and the patient should extend their legs as much as is possible to them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled from the pee to the back parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have mentioned, then the cause is violently made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and the needle should be subtle, like a cane of a reed or a feather, thin as a ray, in similarity to half a palm, to which there is a subtle pipe at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the handling of the emission of urine with it is that you take the thread doubled and tie it in the extremity of the wool or cloth for a good ligature; and insert the extremities of the thread into the part behind the syringe, and if there are superfluous threads cut them off if they cause an obstruction to the wool, but insert it vigorously into the pipe. Then fill the syringe with water and introduce it to the body.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Make the patient sit on a chair, and anoint their bladder and genital area with oil of olive and agar, and apply heat.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter with facility until it reaches the root of the genital area; and then bend the genital area upwards towards the navel; and then push the catheter inside; and then push it in until it reaches the bladder, and this action makes the patient understand that the cause of their trouble is being treated, and it's not done in this order, but rather as needed to relieve the obstruction.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then pull the thread from the bladder little by little, so that the urine wets the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and do it for the cure of urine, and use a catheter, don't stop doing this and using a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 49.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of cleansing the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in it, then use an instrument called a clamp, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But in the extremity of it, the vein is stopped.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that one there are three perforations: two from one side, thus many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning of the place is a cavity, in which is that which is injected, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that one, added to, until when some cause is drawn from that of the humidity, is pulled, and when it is expelled, with that it is pulled, and when it is expelled far, according as it makes clamp or grasp with which naphta is picked in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and pull with that the liquid which is injected to the lower parts, so that the humidity is pulled into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the rod according to what we have recommended in the description; and then inject the humidity with the liquid that you inject, so that the humidity passes to the bladder as much as possible, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle bladder channel in which the bladder is catheterized, and this is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or of gold, of which the head is similar to a small plum, and place the cane with the ligature on it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of the motor, and pause on it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and evaporate this humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the crystalizer into the rod.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity and structure that descends into it, so that the disease can feel that the humidity has already penetrated to the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate it with all its thickness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they are wrapped; and then attach the circle in the same way that it is attached to the navel, because you place on it what you want of the humidities, and waters and juices.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that one to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand so that the humidity penetrates to the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter sign or possibly related to the head.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of foot (possibly related to a medical procedure).
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of the species of foot (or possibly stone) and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of the stone in which surgical operation on the hand is required, and section (or cutting).
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone generated in the bladder itself is the one that is formed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I have thus given a clear and concise explanation of it.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to the infants; and of its signs it is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its thinness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs their groin, and many times they have a swollen penis; and it is treated with this: and with this the stone comes out through the urine in most of these cases.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is a joyful healing for the children under the age that they have reached 14 years; and it is a difficult cure for the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it's moderate, because it's between the two (i.e. not as easy to cure as in children, nor as difficult as in the elderly).
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the pain is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that to cleanse the patient with a crister which will extract all the fistula that is in their intestine; because that fistula, having been seen and prohibited, prevents the entry of the pain during the examination of them.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then it is necessary to press the patient with their feet up and supported, so that the pain descends to the weight of the bladder, or it jumps from its place, having been seen several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that which is prepared between your hands, and their hands are placed under the thighs of them, so that the bladder is entirely prepared to decline towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then ask for that and all that flows from it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pain in the space, then you will touch them as much as possible with a dried cloth over them.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't touch all of them with your hand, then it is necessary that you anoint the right hand with oil and apply it to the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And seek from the worst part into which the liquid has been placed.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that small amount little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press firmly on that hand with the applied liquid, and push it through to the divisions before the bladder at the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant to extend the genitals to the divisions above with their right hand, and with their left hand hold back the skin which is above the genitals, at the division of the place where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert the spatula so that it becomes incident to this, which is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but beside the left thigh; and let the incision be on that worst part and the applied liquid be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision before is wide and deep according to the quantity that has come out of the worst part as much as possible, and not more, because the weight of what compresses the applied liquid which is in the anus, the worst part will push it away with difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And be aware that from the stone there is some that is attracted to the one with the angle and margins, for which the urination of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that stone there is one that resembles a nut, and is round, and its evacuation is made with difficulty.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then if it is the stone which has angles and margins, adjust it in the cleft.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus protruding, then take care that you press upon it, or that you hold with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file on which you hold against the stone, and does not slip from it; or that you introduce your subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot operate on it, then enlarge the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, sprinkle on it vitriol triturated.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stones are more than one, then at the beginning you introduce the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and immediately cut on it; and immediately introduce a little immediately after; and similarly do if there are many more.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision, for which two causes happen to the patient: either it dies or it has continuous urine retention, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Most administrators of purging induce from the inside what has been expelled, or the injury in the fracture of the inner forearm that extracts it through pressure.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with an ointment of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply on that dressing immersed in oil and wine, or in rose oil and cold water, so that the postulated abscess may be diminished.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then raise the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage for the first three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been undone, wash the area with water and warm oil, and then treat it with a gentle ointment and a soothing balm until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound an abscess forms, it is likely that the blood has congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the expulsion of blood with urine), then insert a tube into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sharp wine, water and salt, and apply all species, with what is convenient for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover in the hours of all treatment that you put both thighs and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck in it, and urination is prohibited, then treat that one with what you have recommended before, since many times this treatment has been accused of causing retention; and already you have tried and it hasn't worked, so take a iron perforator with a thread, whose shape is this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, pointed, stuck in the fist.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to that of the bladder and of the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing with facility until the perforator comes to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone, little by little, and you make the perforation of it until you make it pass to the other part; because the urine is then liberated.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the division of the bladder, because it is loosened, and it is expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not prepared for you by some cause that prohibits it, then apply one poultice to the area, and another poultice above the area.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind above the area on that rod between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then dissolve the ligament and melt the congealed blood, which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave a ligament on the poultice, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and another ligament above, because when the poultice is dissolved, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to leave the poultice above, so that you lift the skin upwards at the separated parts, or that it returns and fills the defect, and covers the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of poultices from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A poultice in women is rarely engendered.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a poultice is seen on one of those women, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited due to too many manual treatments.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is when the woman has strong thighs.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is when you don't find a woman knowledgeable enough to describe to the doctor what is happening, or it is one of the women who have been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is when you don't find a woman knowledgeable in this art, especially the operation on the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision above the hip in women is far from the location of the hip, for which indications of deep incision are given, and in this there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to do so, then take a woman doctor who is knowledgeable, and it is rare to find one.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a midwife who is knowledgeable in the art of women, or a woman who has a share of knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, make that one present, and command her to do all that you order her to do, from the incision above the hip to the beginning; which thing is to examine if the woman has a prolapse, then insert what has been said into her rectum and tie up the hip.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you take that, cut it from the bottom upwards, and then order someone to write on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it doesn't work, then instruct the midwife to insert the bottom upwards into the patient's womb and inquire about the stone, because she will place her left hand on the bladder, and squeeze it with a good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you obtain that, it is good that it gradually draws out the orifice of the bladder to the divisions below at the sum of its virtue entering so that it comes to the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then write on that application of the matrix of the womb towards the root of the thigh from whichever part it may be to the woman, and cut the stone in that part, and let the bottom of it not be removed from the stone cutting below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the blade on that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which you know the stone will be extracted from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the species of stones are many: for some of them are small and large, and rough and sharp, and long and round, and having edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species are of it for that which you signify about that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place a twisted or bent vein and keep it for an hour until the blood is separated, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is cut, then you apply powder on the place and bind it tightly with a bandage to stop the descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because if you do, the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the flow of blood has stopped, and the place is clean, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 52.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section concerning hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an aggregation of humidity in the white spleen which is behind the kidney containing the urine, and is named spleen or cyst.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases it is seen that the prepared nature in the area of the knee is towards the back, until it is cured, which is another matter; and this is the code of the genital area between the white cartilage, which we have already mentioned, and not that one but tartar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because in those it accumulates this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colours, for the colour of it is inclined to be citrine or sanguine, or red, or black and feculent, or whitish and watery, and that which is worse.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this aggregation of water is present: for if it is in the white cartilage which we have mentioned, then the apostema is a little red and inclined to length, like the figure of a knee, and the genital appears, because the humidity contains everything on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its own knee pan, then the apostema is red at the knee joint and thus one estimates that it is another knee.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the genital code and the white cartilage, then one feels it in the centre.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the humidity in the apostema with intertwined cartilage from which the form is preceded; and according to what is exited in the vestige of the cartilage, judge that what is detained in it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of him with iron, then it is advisable that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for you, and at times touch the body of the patient.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let it be placed under the seat two on some cause a little higher, and place your hands under the patient's armpits.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on the right side of him, which extends his rod to both sides at the crotch of the thighs and at the division of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take spatula and divide the crotch of the thighs in the middle place for length between the pubic area and the perineum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to a straight line at a distance from the line that divides the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white hip, including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not cut into it; and your scraping with which you scrape the part should be suspended with a hook and subtly examine the scraping according to the quantity as much as possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the spleen full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the wound with forceps, and pull the spleen apart from the surrounding parts; and do not touch the genital area, and insert the spleen in that manner which is most possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it with its entirety or in pieces, and mainly the subtle sieve, because if you do not perform the insertion of it with exquisite care, it is not done securely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the hole proceeds from that defect of his genital area during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the spleen's wound, return to that, and then adjust the two lips of the genital area with a suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hole corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which support it, and extract the hole, and then cure it with the same treatment that we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore insert the part as you have done in the other treatment; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you purify the wound, and insert a flax seed submerged in oil or in rose oil; and put on top another flax seed that you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two pieces of cloth on the navel; and put above double cloths and powders, and tie them with a bandage that follows this method:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then you press two cloths and fill them with heated flax seed according to this image; and make the extremities that are pressed with a towel or with wet cloth, and add them to the structure of the pants, and one of the extremities take from the thigh between the two, and the second take from the division of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips of the patient, and two other extremities over two shoulders, and all the structure be adjusted in the area of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some times this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery in place of a section with iron; and it is that you take a sharp and subtle knife and make incisions on the code of the genitals, and set fire according to what we have recommended until the white ciphac containing the water is discovered, and then you apply the cautery according to this method:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It is assembled with Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that tissue, and set fire to it so that all the moisture is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch the tissue with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and cauterize it with a finely ignited tool; and cut away as much as you can possibly remove of it; and beware of the hole that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and longer in stopping the flow of blood, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an adverse circumstance during cutting or cauterizing, or excessive bleeding, then take heed that you cure the adverse condition that you are experiencing, with the appropriate treatment that is suitable for it, according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is faint-hearted and does not await the second operation due to its horror, then administer a perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain of this, for what we have said about the symptoms, that this hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then take care to seat the patient on some elevated chair, and pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the wide opening be where all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then put a pause on that place and bind that one and release that one, so that the remainder of the water flows.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal that which is inside so that the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there's a contradiction to the flow of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except for the fact that the white pad in the orifice of the wound creates a contradiction and prohibits the exit of the water, then you should put in the wound a stone or instrument with which the water from the drops is extracted, the form of which is as previously described; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small [object].
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns, and is appropriately evacuated in a few months or around those; and when it is accumulated, then it should be perforated according to that measured method, so that the patient will pass the following days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of section on carnal hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is a fearful loss to the major disposition; because it seems to me that the dismissal of it and being saved by something better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should recall the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the abscess is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made for many causes: either by sharp acute surplus, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And for this reason it is a hardened abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not give way to the touch.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some swellings are made by dilation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those areas where the memory of it has already been perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is from dilation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and do not touch that.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause, except for compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a cut is made and on the other sides; and you will incise the skin of the genitals, and then hold the opening to the separated parts, and extract that from the white scrotum, and release the suspensor of the veins, and tie them, and incise the suspensor until you release that entirely from all the separated parts of the opening.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the oil has already consolidated with the meat broths, then it's good that you extract the oil and inject it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adherence between some cause of the liver, or between that which is between the intestines, then it's good that you deliver all that adherence and inject it through a round injection.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	More so if it's a birth of flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind, then it's good that you inject all that is from it, and extract the oil thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with flaxseed soaked in rose oil and wine; and then heal that with another cure among those that are healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernia that is from the gut.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A hernia is an apostema enclosed by some enclosure resembling a broth with softening of the testicles, and makes difficult movement exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease it is to be feared for that thing from which it is preceded, a memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However it's good that we say operation on it in the way that the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is good to place the patient on an elevated seat; and then insert the suspension of the testicles into the separated parts of the thighs; and also take the ligament of the genitals with the fingers at the said places, which are proved to be near the penis; and hold those other servants that you have, and extend those with extension vehement.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the spatula laterally through a transverse section in the right of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape from the entire affected area thus as you have said in extraction of varices which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then put in those a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that on the first of the places where you have inserted, and tie the other end at the back of it.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle place through a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated of foul, corrupted and putrid humidity.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with care for the other wounds in which you want to be healed by so that the vessels, which are not one of the two genitals, do not fall, for this is not an evil.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	More often it happens that death occurs to all the intestines, when it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for this reason be cut from the intestines, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the removal of the intestines, and that they are exhausted, or that this happens so that there is no youth in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a weakness that develops in the sifac extended over the belly from the angles of the diaphragm of the belly, so that by saying the intestines of that rupture go to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its weakness, and these two species occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by wound, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy thing, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this thing, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is a swelling that grows between the navel and the pubic area because the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a weakness of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain to happen suddenly; and it is a diverse swelling apparent in the groin, and this thing is for exit of the intestine, and the body of it goes out through the parts below the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine bursts through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called intestinal or gut hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by obesity, and sometimes it runs into the intestinal fold, and here it gets stuck, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it becomes a painful and more serious condition when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the species of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is desirable that the evacuation be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys its return, and then be wrapped over its coil between your hands, and elevate their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then sew the pouch, which is the pouch of the testicles, to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles throughout its length; and then place two lips of the suture in the wound according to how you indicated to close the wound with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the wound, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from which the hole has been made.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the foreskin that covers the testicles, until the white hard skin of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert the finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, which is covered by the skin of the testicle, and between the second skin, and loosen the adherence that is in the back part of the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then bring the hand to the skin of the testicles to the front parts, and also extend the white skin with the left hand, and lift the testicle with the skin to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to hold the testicle in place and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complex solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And examine with the fingers if there is not any cause of the intestine being enveloped in the hard white skin.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then push it back to the belly afterwards.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle in which there is a thick thread made of four threads, and insert it beneath the back of the skin, which is under the skin of the testicles, where the incision is; and then tie the ends of the thread that come out of the flesh until there are four threads, and then tie some of them over a figure in the shape of a cross; and tie it to the skin with strong ligature on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins with a violent ligature, so that none of the vessels can irritate them, and thus prevent any cause from occurring here, so that an abscess or tumor does not form.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And put another ligature, second in order, three fingers from the first ligature; and then place these two ligatures at a distance from the navel, where the quantity of the size of the testicles is determined, and cut all the remaining part according to roundness, and remove from it the excess.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut in the area below the cord of the testicles with a section from which blood and pus flow, as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply the wool soaked in oil, and put it on the wound; and apply the ligature that we have recommended (and some times the white cautery is applied to the navel, which we have said regarding the incision of the vein with flow of blood, because many times these things happen) and loosen the ligature so that it does not fall.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the evacuation of the urine is delayed, then let warm water be poured, and put it on that area so that it falls, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia or Of Hernia related to Gas.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with wine; which is that you lift the vessels near the section above that with facility of it; and near the middle place in the surroundings of the apostema with that which helps that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disability that is made in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some swellings show a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and swell the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not tell the knees any cause of the intestines to the knees; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to them every hour.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, a fissure is adjusted in the spine until the intestine descends into the spine; and it happens that due to the extension of the spine, which is in the ankles as we have said, the cause is why the spine is stretched, and near the place is softened and the area becomes swollen.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The treatment of it is with a cautery thus that it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some times it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses with a scalpel for the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white spleen that is under the ribcage until it becomes uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the vein and place it on the prominent area of the spleen, and press it against the pressure of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent areas on the extremity of the vein of the spleen, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the vein, and do not incise the spleen at all, nor extend the hole, nor another cause thus that you will know to do in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that one with the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the skin, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the spleen is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more beneficial to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cords of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the cords of the testicles are wrapped in certain men it is softened by fat, because the tissues that are between them are softened, and their protection is weakened.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for the one who is entrusted with the cure to make the patient urinate according to his need, and to cut all the cord which has been softened above the natural cord; and then to adjust the two lips of the wound.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, sew up at the beginning the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by treating the other wounds until it is healed and the fevers subside.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for a reason I am allowed to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two manners, one of which is that it be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in it, so that he knows the cure of it when it happens; and the other manner is that we sometimes have need of castration of other animals for our young, such as mules, and oxen, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attrition or by incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	More in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast stay in hot water until the genitals of it become soft and flexible and hang loose.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand among them so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be touched.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	More in cauterization done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspender, and make an incision above each testicle with one cut so that two testicles are separated.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those parts that you want to remove from each one.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, except for a thin skin which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of cauterization is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves some cause for the testicles through which the beast desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter twelve.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that which occupies the space in the scrotum of testicles, in which there is between two testicles a figure like that of a woman, for whom there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some come out of that corrupted urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is one species: and it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is like two testicles of a man, a little altogether diminished, divided into a foreskin like that of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and of one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should cut those adjusted flesh so that the pus of it flows out, and then you will cure it with the cure of the other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men, from which comes corrupted urine which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On protruding tongue and flesh caused by women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Tight bandage is applied on natural causes within which it is strengthened and made, and the treatment is admired in some women to the point where it is spread like in men and seen in the act of intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then remove the excess of bandage with your hand or with scissors and clippers.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut in the end, mainly on the root of the reason, so that there is no effusion of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that wound with the cure of wounds within which it will be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Meat born prematurely is meat that is born in the horror of the mother within which it fills that, and a bandage is applied to the parts of the belly according to the appearance of the body (and for this reason some first call it "fallen sickness"); then remove that we cut thus as we cut bandages, and cure that within which it will be healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or the hole is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and this is caused by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick spleen.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made in the prison of the womb, or in the costs of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits coition and pregnancy and childbirth, and strengthens the prohibitions of the menses.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by examination of the matrix, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then you search for that with your fingers or at the region.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cyst, and it is proclaimed to the two lips, then you cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that dust is applied to the two lips with powders, and then you apply your fingers inside indicating both hands of the patient.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, the thighs extended, and then you extend the two lips of the vulva to force until that subtle cyst is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a linen cloth and wet it in oil and apply that to the place, and keep it there all day so that the wound is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cyst is large and thick, then it is necessary that you incise that with a spatula or with a knife of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More often if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with an ointment, and inject that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you have the medicines that stop the flow of bloody discharge such as hematolia, and dragon's blood, and juniper, adjusted with the white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide pipe of lead so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer an ointment of dried plants.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it will be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some times accidents happen in the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary to inject according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to cancerous abscesses, for the cancerous abscess which is in the matrix let there not be made a counter-irritation with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tailor's and of red botch that happens in the cleft of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the openings of many veins in which from those openings flows continuous blood; and when they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are made into piles.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that tumors and ulcers when they are in the womb of a woman and do not appear to the feeling, then in those cases treatment should not be made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the woman on which feeling is detected, those are the ones that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is good that you put the woman in a cold compress and then extend the tumor with the forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut those at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on those wounds the flow of blood of one of the incisive powders, which is mortification, thus as cassia and similar to them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then immerse the feet in water for an hour, and then dip that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that seat in a decoction of sumac and of seeds of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster and apply it on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, then apply warmth to both sides of the abdomen, and scarify the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in juice of colic root or juice of arnagloza or juice of guarravier wine, and apply it to the area; and then heal the area with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	More than that, I ask you to be careful with what has been said, because you wrote down what appeared to you from the section that I have spoken about in the aforementioned treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the accidental perforation of the intestine in the stomach.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various kinds of abscesses that occur in the stomach, such as cancer and apostema of the liver, ulcers, and tumors, and also hemorrhoids, and fistulas, and hemorrhages, and ragadia, and pus, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken about these ailments and the types of those and the symptoms of those, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I say that I will discuss in this treatise on abscesses the one that appears in the stomach when it is of the abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore consider if the pain of the abscess in the beginning is sharp with percussion and flecma and fever, and sometimes that redness and if it falls on that sentiment, then do not try to perforate it, and cure it with that which helps with the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents cease.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then make the woman lie on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her legs adjusted to the division of the belly, and her thighs spread apart, and place her arms below her shoulders, and tie each one with a ligature to something convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife takes the right hand and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, the form of which will be described in those cases that will be made next.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then when you want to administer this instrument, fix it on the presentations of the matrix of the woman, and that which of the instrument enters into the matrix should not be larger than the presentation of the matrix and the patience of the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the presentation of the matrix, then you should place a poultice on the texture of the presentation of the matrix so that the entrance of any instrument into the matrix is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you hold the vertebra that runs along the instrument of the side, from above and below, and the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebra until the orifice of the matrix is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excoria appears, and it is touched by the hand and is found to be soft and smooth, then it is necessary that you cut that which is above the head of the patient with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply to the wound a medicated plaster submerged in heated oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and apply the chalk to the section on the surface of the matrix.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And put on the matrix and over the perineum a clean cloth submerged in water in which there are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be cured, within two days, provided that what is convenient for the disease is applied until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the matrix and the wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which there is boiled root of iris or of aristology, and then returned to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply entrenched in the matrix, then it is necessary that you abstain from the cure of it with iron, instead cure it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the unnatural embryo should be treated according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman push out the placenta and desire to smell the air, and above that she is relieved by what is above her from the part, and hastens the exit of the embryo, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and its exit is over the pubic bone, and the second one is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see those signs, then it is good to compress the belly of the woman so that the embryo descends gently as it should descend over the pubic bone, and give her the second one, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	More often that which is another part is unnatural and inescapable, because when the embryo exits over its feet and the body of it is exited before the head of it and its feet, and one hand of it, or at the foot of it, or its head and its hand, or at the belly of it, and forcibly it is turned over the pubic neck, and resembling the figures of it inescapable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause for the midwife is to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard herself from error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And she shows the entire figure of those things, and what device is in those things so that it is signified by them and is established upon them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated above the womb by natural progression, and it is vehement in the woman and is made for her difficult part, and times the virtue of the already debilitated one, then make that which the women have, and evaporate the congealed humor with a decoction of fenugrec and ointment of humid things.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her hand between the woman's thighs, a small spatulum, and with that makes an incision in the secondine, or cuts it with her nail, through which is expelled that which is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the fetus comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then give that the woman be treated with a mixture of opium and decoction of fenugrec with cypress.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and command the servant, that she be wrapped up, and make her throw up with a concoction; and tie her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the fetus will be forced out as soon as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are joined at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with facility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If it does not obey the entrance, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and put the chair close to the ground; and let the woman be held so she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not skilled and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remainder of the fetus or tie the body to the hand of the mother with a cloth and extract that one equally, because that will be deformed.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the extraction of the embryo above the two feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is above the two feet, then it is necessary that you push those upwards, and return the fetus to its normal position, and then you should turn it, and take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are extracted from between the thighs, then you command it to be expelled, and make that one extend with condition, because it will be deformed if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not deformed with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until it assumes its natural figure, because it will then be deformed with a difficult extraction.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to use all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of high altar and dissolved gum, and strike the mortar with good percussion, and return the thread to the knot of the woman, the pus at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And put that mixture in lukewarm water, until it achieves the desired hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the patient's divided parts are thus softened, then do to them the sub-fumigation of myrtle and apply that under their pause.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make a paste on a cloth, and return that to induce vomiting and clear the patient's mouth, and raise them from that, and press the lower part of their belly with gentle compression, so that the flatulence may be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Empty the flatulence over the sick person's bed and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the flatulence is expelled in this manner, then insert your fingers little by little between the patient's hands; and place the woman's face on the sick person's neck, and her feet are hanging down, and those are resting on the bed, and join their hands together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press on the patient's belly little by little, and extract what is behind their feet from the earrings until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them with violent movement, and press what is above the hypochondrium little by little until the foot reaches the separated parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert his hands and elevate the foot little by little, and command the woman to press inside until the foot is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	A weight on the foot hangs longitudinally pending from one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be put in reduction of the hand of the patient, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go up.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if going up is not possible, then make the patient lie on their side, and strike the thighs of the patient with violent concussion, and then administer ointments to the places which are bruised and affected by humors.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if swelling has come, then make the patient sit on a chair, and then attend to the reduction of the hand, and raise the foot according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press inside until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	A weight on the foot rests on the shoulder with the hands expanded and the surface of the patient's foot is at the mother's (or woman's) two hips.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the hand of the infant and gently turn that small one little by little, and thus facilitate that.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it is narrowed, then pause on the joint of the one we have recommended oil and mucilages for.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command to the one that he massage little by little, and when you have made it, then make that vessel sit on a chair and command him to be leaning on his right side, and command to him that he be compressed; and make that he purge with condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus exits over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you hasten the horrific thing from the matrix according to this method, consider, and then you insert your fingernail between that which is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and the neck of the one, then you insert that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then embed the fetus in the divided parts within so that it pauses according to what it needs, and send to the woman that she compress several times, and it will be pushed out with ease, if God or nature wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or abortion of many.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	It is known that twins and many births are a sign of bad digestion, and some women give birth to three or four, but this is strange and unusual; however, I know the natural causes, and it is not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And it is said that these, already being multiple, a second birth, and they are separated by the navel, distinguish those between the ligament in the navel of each one of them. And some women are aborting without giving birth, as if it were a natural thing to expel, and some women are expelled with an unnatural expulsion, just like we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, they hinder the birth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And the midwife should be subtle and do what facilitates and subtlety, and with slowness, and she should be ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared for her by the ingenious art of health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed with one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more, and already it has been verified by me that one woman aborted seven, and another ten, all of which were formed, the cause of which was made by measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And so it seems that in the science of midwifery, a strong hand is needed for that delicate part, and thus one should do as one does with a similarly sensitive area.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 26.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus with the method we have described in the division of medicine and it is not an abortion, and you are forced to use surgery, then consider if the woman is of good virtue and not at risk for accidents through which loss is feared for her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back on a seat or chair, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold the two parts of her, or tie her to the seat, so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should anoint the mouth of the matrix (womb) with oils, and with mucus of hazel and of wormwood and of pennyroyal.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then insert her hand with ease into the womb, and then seek with the hand the place where the fetus is situated.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And find a convenient place for this: then consider if the foot is prepared to be treated on the upper part of the head, and then fix the nails in the heels of the patient, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or on the beard, or in the furrow of the patient, or in the proper places of the ribs, or on the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Maybe if the treatment is for the patient's feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And take the nail with the right hand, and hold the curvature of the patient in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with facility and fix the nail in some of those places which we have mentioned, until reaching the hidden cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then put and fix on the patient's shoulder another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is equally attractive, and not extended according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be tied to the entire partition, so that the patient's treatment is alleviated thus as it is done for the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And take in the patient what is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then take that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and inserts them skillfully and turns them in the retained matter.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the affected part of the foot is swollen, then the ankles should be bandaged to prevent it from getting worse; and do so until the entire foot is treated.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is swollen on the other side, and it's not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and take it out until it's all treated, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do so on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or it adheres to its contraction in the swelling, or it's at the head of the watery part adjusted, then it should be inserted between the sharp-edged spatulas and the head opened and the water extracted, or that be scraped with an instrument which is called “alundat”, the shape of which will be seen among the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which is relevant to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the foot has a naturally large head: then it should be cut with a chisel, or that be pierced with an "alundat" as we have said; and take out the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is elevated and constrained by the armpits, then be prepared to cut into where the humidity that is in the chest is drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	More or less if it's not complicated, nor does it hinder elevation, then you will elevate the head as much as is possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the stools of the belly are inflamed or it is in dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate that area through which runs the humidity that is in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	More or less if the fetor (bad smell) is above the two feet, then the attraction of it is to be directed and its direction to the mouth of the matrix (womb) is to be directed.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	More or less if it is constrained by the belly and the chest, then it is necessary that you extract that which you have wrapped with a cloth around your hand, and that you cut the belly and the chest through which runs what is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	More or less if the other members are stopped and the head is turned, then insert the middle finger of the left hand; more or less if the mouth of the womb is open, then insert the hand into the pregnant woman's perineum, and pull the head towards that place, and push it with the fingers into the mouth of the womb, and put one or two fingers inside, and pull it towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an apostemal cautery which causes it to stick to the urine, then beware that it does not create trouble for her; however beware then to administer effusion of humid and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the pain is on the side of the back, then if possible, it should be pricked: and there should be administered what we have said in the case of the living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And beware that you do not leave any cause of discomfort within the second intestine.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in the apostems that cause adhesions to the womb.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is an discharge of bloody flux, then apply astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose womb a dead child was made, and then upon that place another pregnant womb was formed, and the dead fetus is the cause of another affliction.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to her that for a long time an apostem forms on the navel; it becomes inflamed and inside that place a tumor grows, and begins to exert pressure.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called to treat them, and have treated them for a long time, and the wound is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you have placed on them some plaster of strong attraction for certain causes, and extracted from them a bone, and then passed a probe, and extracted another bone; and you have been very much astonished, as if there were no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore you probed the wound, and extracted from it many bones, a woman existing in her seventh month of pregnancy, and had been ill in this manner for a long time, and a small arm came out of it.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not think it strange, but rather that it is science and help to know what the skilled doctor has placed on the hand for the purpose of administration.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of a tool with which the matrix is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of the extractor in which the limbs are enclosed, an enclosure that has two handles on both ends of two arms.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	It is better for this instrument to be made so that it is more subtle and slender, and to be made of ivory or of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each rib is two fingers and the margin of each side is one finger, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle area of two ribs there are two adjustments of that same rib, which are already firm, whose length is a little more than half a palm, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additives should be introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it opens to those when you administer the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another one similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made from ribs of ebony or boxwood according to the similarity of strengths.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	More importantly, at the extremity of it, there are two additives thus many times, and the length of these additives is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the matrix with these, then make the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then take your hand with the instrument thus as you make an incision according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the mouth of the matrix, until the meter makes it the size that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of swelling in which the foot is swollen:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of illness in which the big head is contracted:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps to which the teeth are attached in the extremity, thus as times, and some times it is made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus as times, to which the teeth are attached thus as teeth of resin with which it is incident and contracted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of little illness:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a wound having a spine or thorn:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a wound having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which the teeth of wax are attached with which the head of the foot is contracted:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatulum having two extremities with which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more the species of that one are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is easier for them to operate and more useful for men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments, for it is necessary that you should have them prepared, because the need for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the secondine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondine is retained, it is necessary to command the patient to retain their breath, and then make them induce vomiting with a condition, and strengthen your hand over their mouth and nostrils, and if by this means it is expelled, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a flask and perforate the cover of it with a hole and place in that herb opening of the mouth of the mother, such as calamint and rue and anise and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santuary.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	Put all these herbs or some of them submerged in water in the flask, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then put a cane tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her vomit as we have said, and the secondine will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if the Roman method does not work, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sesame or in a mixture of altea, and then insert that into the womb and search for the secondine, and when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the placenta of the mother, then insert the hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the secondine, extract it slowly so that the mother does not fall into vehement pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Let the right and left costs be loosened with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust in the amount of traction, so that it will obey and free itself from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the womb's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with purging and medication of the belly with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Unless it is forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not perform on that one in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what comes out of it from the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman, and then anoint that one with plaster and tetrapharmacon; for that will make it rot and will be dissolved and will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, it rises from it to the head and to the stomach, and that harms the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already knew about sub-fumigation of Nazareth's powder and of dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and of the secundine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It must be done with sight or by feeling.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the subtle extremity be placed in the pot and the wider extremity over the focus, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that inside until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then insert another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the navel of the unperforated infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some infants are born and their navels are not perforated, which have a thin and closed-up scab.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then tell the midwife to pierce that scab with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And immediately apply on that place a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil; and cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it will close up, then put a small tube in the wound for several days, and remove it when the infant is about to be weaned.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And also closure of the navel occurs due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut, and immediately treated with what we have said about treatment and plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur in the feet.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the foot cause swelling and thickening, which occur near the ankle or in the space of one foot.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when this swelling is old and rotten with moist whitish or subtle purulence, and some of these fistulas are penetrated.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrated are known by what comes out of them through discharge and flatulence; and some times the patient is forced to discharge, and often what comes out of them is worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas that penetrate in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those that penetrate go into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the sign by which a penetrating fistula is recognized as entering into the anus and not entering, is that you put your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of iron or needle into the fistula when it is not suppurating.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is suppuration in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into which you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that the entire bowel or any part of the passage causes any reason for purging or worms or bloating, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of it is excessive urine from that and prohibition to him from going to that place where medicine should be applied.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	More so if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the tendon penetrates here, if there isn't a fracture in the bone, and cause of pain in the circuit of the affected area; and that from it comes pus and abscesses; and that medicine is not effective on it, nor is consolidated with plaster.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the treatment of them is labor and vanity of foolish doctors about which they boast.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and not chronic, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and what you have already done and proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on the back of theirs, and lift their legs up towards them, the thighs bent to their belly, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if there is a fracture in the fistula, so that you can feel the place where the tendon penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sensation affects the patient around the neck, then it is good that you insert your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the already mentioned uncovered tendon to penetrate, or what you feel between the tendon and the vein or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	More perhaps the emperor said some things that are healthy for some men to swallow.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medication by which it is hoped to cure the young man, that you apply subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as has been previously stated, and insert that fire into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then repeat this action two or three times until you know that all those adjusted and fistulized flesh have adhered, resembling a feather's down.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal that wound with bandages wrapped in gauze until all the adhered flesh has grown together, and then heal it with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healthy within a certain time for another healing.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the needle enters, and does not penetrate entirely through the thigh, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the needle which is only a layer of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula is in what is the surface of the codena, then cauterize the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will cauterize with the needle, and it will be in the fistula so that the section penetrates to the place where the extremity of the needle appears, and through the needle it is liberated and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then carefully clean those fistulated flesh wounds which are assembled with a tube of pen or awl and do not break those or any of them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	More often if there is a flow of blood that comes between you and your operation when dissecting those flesh wounds, then milk that should be and of the pus the sharper instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts good habits: it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh, and removal of the blood and excision of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that wound which is covered in bandages or in dressings within the place where the arm is, and then treat the wound with soft flesh growing and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	These medicines are stipulated and administered in the same quantities; when the hour is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already entered into the rectum and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the aforementioned finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you feel the tension and between you and it is a veil of cartilage or flesh, and is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation in the hand but rather a matter of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize that area as we have said; or to cut it so that you achieve the cavity of the body, through which it is possible to insert the instruments and the proposed cure; and do not proceed with too much cutting so that you do not injure the lacert containing the intestine, and approach the patient with calmness and gentleness of action, according to their will; and then treat it with what we have said before, for it will be strong and healed; or to extend that veil and clean the pus that is cut from the area near the anus, as we have said, either with the finger or another sharp instrument, and cleanse those fistulized carnifications that are in the cut area where you can make a perforation; and then strive to make the restoration of the entire wound with cutting, and if the pus underneath is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some fistulas are finished in this manner: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is in the flesh of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the buttocks, then take a thread of perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the cures according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it in that vein wrapped with 5 veins or around those; and then insert the thread into the vein in the fistula until you achieve the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	More if it penetrates the margin of the buttocks deeply inside, then you extract the vein from that hole like you insert your finger in the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when you notice the vein has grown into the flesh, tighten again until those pieces of flesh are grown between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	More if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner you have prepared, but let it be soft in the pressing, because it is not for you to do that which prevents the flesh from growing; and then do so with that one until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula is thorny at the place where the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not insert anything that is not necessary, thus as needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the stitching of congealed blood in which runs a vein at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Congealed blood is according to two methods, for or on the skin surface it seems that there are carbuncles, or those are like a layer of rough fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, small and large, and the blood that runs through them is one, and it is very abundant, and it is outside the skin, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Worse are those that are outside the skin according to the measure of little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and it is according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is next to the skin is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze so that the blood comes out and the congealed blood appears to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you will take and suspend with force or that you hold those with your fingernail, and then cut those according to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the ulcers are not held in place by the humidity and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or with a cotton swab or with a flannel of wool, and extract those with the fingers, and return them to their place, and sprinkle some powders on them, for they can be used in place of cauterization; or cauterize them as it was previously written in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then treat the patient with a suppository in which there is a small prickling, and let it be washed with that water that is in the bowel and which will facilitate evacuation gently when the patient presses.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are painful near the anus, then the cause of them is removed, and it is that you take those with your fingernail, or that you take those with a needle, and insert them, and then heal them with the water that we have mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the one who has undergone an incision, see that you administer suture of them in this manner: take thread wrapped and thread it through the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the separated parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extracted threads of the thread around the separated part beside the needle, and tighten lengthwise; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then tie the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Make a cut on the entire area, and let out one of them and not touch it, so that the excess blood flows from that place.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then put a poultice on the buttocks made with rose oil or wax; and put that on the buttocks and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let out what is inside the wound; and when it is cured, treat those wounds with an ointment or another cure that may be healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mouths blocked by excessive evacuation of wound or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, it is advisable to apply these with the point of a spatula or with your own nail so that they are made humid and so that the pus is drawn out from those ulcers, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then treat them so that they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply these with a violent purging that first cleans the wound and are scraped off; and then treat them so that they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of indigestion, thus it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	It is known that indigestion, thus it is clear, and it is not if not noticed according to the color of the body resembling a head of carnation, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts behind the feet and in the thighs, and it extends with those pains to the ankles.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then consider that the thing which is in the circuit of the claw, should be cut with scissors or with a nail, and should be eradicated from its root; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the following which is mentioned in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More warty growths are small rough rounded fistulas on the surface of the body, and similar warts appear on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to stretch and cut that, or to tighten it with a thread or a needle that holds inside.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the warts, both inward and outward, are eradicated with the instrument that you previously mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More warty formations are small feathery or fistulous growths on the surface of the body, especially on the groin, and when you touch it, it is felt as a burning of ant bites, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a needle of elder tree or of willow, and make it sharp, and apply it on the warty growth until it contains the circle of the needle with the parts that are affected; and then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut what is in the circuit of the wart, and press it into the flesh of the groin, and eradicate the wart from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make this with a cane of iron or of wood according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the end of the cane have subtlety, be blunt (that is, not perforated), enveloped so that above the said thing the apprehension of it is abolished and the revolution of that thing.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the woman according to what is said before in the cauterization of atheil in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of instruments that are administered to give a purging.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some suppositories are made of silver or of gold or of iron melted or alloyed; and some suppositories are made from those small and large instruments according to those for whom they are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of little children should be small; and for those whose bottoms are fragile or delicate, their suppositories should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few suppositories:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cane at its end where the bag is tied should be wide in this manner; and let the distinction be where the bag is tied, thus many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the stick that is inserted in the bottom should be blunt (that is, not pointed), smooth like a file, and subtle; and on one side of the stick there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the threads and the thicker the thread, the smaller the hole.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or sheep's skin are placed be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated by many holes thus as it is rolled up; and if the space in which is between the holes the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes a strong thread of crude wax which should be of twelve threads, or surround those; and adjust to it the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, let it be tied at the head of the sick person between two distinguishing signs with strong constraint, and then tie around each hole: Moreover the quality of tying around that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it not be too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be lifted up on his back, and raise his legs in air and place under them a cushion on which are the men or a blanket; and anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucus of fenugreek or with similar things; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and squeezes it with two fingers and presses with vehemence until all that is in the gut is evacuated from the bowel; and then remove the gut and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if medicine forces out the excess, hold it in as much as possible; and if sleep comes to that person for a whole night, it is more beneficial in treatment.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you treat that person for illnesses of abdominal discharge and their excess, then you will repeat the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the treatment be subtle and gentle, one of the treatments with which the children will be treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds what was suitable for the book, and I will speak thus to the cure of those with medicine according to the complaint.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where the wounds occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many wounds are made are like so: a blow with a stone, or a cut with a sword, or with a knife, or a hit with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More wounds that are in the places of the body are like so: a wound on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And thus we recommend the cure of certain wounds for which one pauses this reasoning and rule over the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And we will begin with the simple head wounds, for the discussion of the compound ones will come to the understanding of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow with a stone or something similar, and the skin has only been scratched and it is a large wound and you fear the onset of an aposteme, then you should apply a compress and perform a cephalic bloodletting as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract from that vein according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient, unless there is some prohibitive cause for bloodletting, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the bloodletting be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from indigestion and wine and coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if a minor cause prohibits it, then let the diet be diminished and not approached with meat nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply to the wound, if an aposteme occurs, cotton pads soaked in rose oil or wine in which there is a styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	More certainly if the abscess is caused by a hot cauterization, then pause on the wound, if it is recent with blood and pus and the air has not changed that powder which you will recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause on the ulcers' ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	More if the wound is large or is due to a cut of flesh and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them with suture as you will be advised regarding the suture of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	More if the wound has already exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not retention of it but a small suspensor, then cut that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of deadness, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there are roughness: cabbage and beans and similar things to them, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the deadness putrid flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut all that rotten part and throw it away, and properly cure what remains.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	More if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come, and it is not stopped by medicines, then press on the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity provokes you to what we have said does not help, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is rheum; thus that you powder over those wounds a powdered substance, which consolidated, will stop the air from affecting those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and three parts of unextinguished lime; grind everything together and crush it, and fill the wound with it, and constrain it with a good bandage until it adheres to the wound, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten that dressing with bandages and lay it thus, and do not remove it while it is so, because the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this sole treatment is sufficient, when you do not have at hand iris and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this medical operation is performed on large wounds when it is convenient to place it on them and they are constrained, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer, then it is not suitable for the application of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, thus that you apply on them certain digestive ointments, or that you apply on them dust made from flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they form a poultice; and then cure them with another treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	More often if a fracture occurs in the bone and it's broken, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the cure for head fractures is something that is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the sores of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	More often if a wound occurs in the neck, then it's not different in medication, and between a head wound when it's simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	More often if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it's a nerve, it's not in the remedy but rather the treatment should be avoided with that which causes vehement constriction, thus like congealing and cauterizing, which are similar to glass and seem to prevent urination, and contrary to those nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And don't apply anything on the wound that causes total freezing, because the substance of nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it's something that is cured with gentle medicines, such as a wound washed with warm water, some ointment rubbed in with oil, whether rose or non-rose, and honey when it's washed with warm water and the other plaster applied according to this manner, and anointed humidly.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer a suture, or stitch the lips of it, and carefully treat that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or reaches to the lower most part of the buttocks, then puncture that in the place most depressed.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound an artery has already been cut and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or constrict it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity compels you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the tendons of the ankle or all have been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with a suture on the bone of the ankle and do not touch that; but equalize it and return it to its natural figure, and place it in a decent structure, and keep it still for some days; and treat it with an ointment in which there is stippped and excited until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can; and what is not visible, leave it until the wound suppurates, and be separated and the impression of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder on that powder which you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	More so if in the wound there is made a fistula, then treat it with that of which the memory will bring back closely in the following chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or of similar ones, when made between the shoulders and is made with a spatula or with a knife or with a lance or with similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a piercing of a lance or of a knife, and observe the depth of it, then consider more so if from the wound comes pus when the patient urinates; then know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then you apply on it from the first hour powder, and do not squeeze that which is not retained blood in the depth of it and which returns to the heart and which helps the patient, more apply on it a contracting ointment, and divide those two doses into four parts of the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at your present, then apply on the orifice of the wound a lot of cloth to suck what comes from the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is in it can be drained.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has already passed three days or more and does not cause spasms or tremors of the heart, nor strictures of the gut, but instead shows other good dispositions, then it is known that the plague is salvageable; and therefore treat it with heat and with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is excessive, and too much time has passed, then it is known that a fistula has already been made; therefore treat it according to the seventh chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is by cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat it with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been made an incision in the bone, and some of its fragments are loose, then you must turn the wound and cut to extract those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the treatment for the young is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great indispositions, some are seen in the intestine or the nerve of the intestine, because it makes for a violent and subtle interruption of them and the suture of them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another handling, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if not done at the time of the interruption of them to their own place, so that it swells and becomes enlarged, because the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suture of the stomach is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are suitable for sutures of the other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures relate to the other ailments, but however they are more proper in the suture of the stomach.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the ailment is small and it comes from a cause of the intestine for this reason, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two methods: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has come to inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when that happens, it is necessary that you scratch the area in such a way that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in warm water alone, or that you take a broom in boiling water, and cypress, and spike lavender, and apply them to the intestine so that the inflammation may be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some women have seen that it helps with the condition, and it is better than just water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And then when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked altaea and mallows, because by that the inner part of it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the inner part of it is excused from this cure, then you should make an incision with a small instrument with which the inflamed parts are cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and no occupation to section, but only necessity and gentle handling.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part not pointed, and the extremity is subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula, rather a little blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form, in its proper place, if possible, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the rupture is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and hold their legs up to their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and chest up above the affected parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pay attention and consideration to this fact, that the affected part where the wound is, be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary that you administer this in severe wounds and in moderate wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, hold that which is your preparation, and see to it that the minister be among your most trusted, who should have the rupture entirely in their hand and adjust the lips of the wound, and see to it that they uncover from that wound to the one who knows the suture for another cause or reason.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: one that takes the needle, or thread of needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and place it at the extremity of the disruption of the said ankle, and tighten the needle once, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the codena, but rather in the two extremities of the ciphac which is held by the codena of the parted edges, until you make that part penetrate; and you have already added the two extremities of the codena and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some watched parts together, and add the two lips and the wound for decent addition; and place the thickness of the said one and fix another needle in it, and tie that one with faith as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be moderate between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles easily enter the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the codena, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not advisable for the needle to be placed in both extremities of the knee joint, so that the flesh is not excessively injured and the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged with stitches so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the threads so that the patient does not feel them while sleeping; and you will place expansive powders on the entire suture, which hold the ends of the threads; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of stitches with needles in what manner are more convenient for small wounds, for which one or two stitches are sufficient.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer with a stitch the four extremities, of the knee and two extremities of the hip, in one way, with a needle in which is wrapped thread in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have the needle penetrating these four extremities, return the needle from the middle part from which it began, so that the thread is pulled back from the deepest part to the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch of cloth in which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And stop between each suture the amount of thickness of the said finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in this suture I treated the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his lower abdomen, which had been wounded with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms from the intestine in the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that pus which the intestine had formed outside the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I cured that one and it is healed; and then I visited him often for many years, and he conversed in his own faculties.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle it was, for I did not cure it with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not effective, nor any medicine, but I placed on the wound a cotton pad twice a day and assiduous washing with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two special types of suture according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the intestine, and insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the coding and in that doctor's lancet according to rectitude and in length of all the body, and it leaves the extremity of the spleen where you have inserted the needle; and make penetrate into the other extremity the needle from the part of the intestine to the part of the kidney in the other extremity of the liver.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the liver from the part of the kidney to the part of the intestine; and leave the extremity of the spleen which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity of the part of the intestine to the part of the kidney.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate with that your penetration, with which you made it penetrate in the spleen, in the extremity of the marrow which is in the part of it within, where all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start with this doctor's treatment and sew with the extremity that is of the spleen on the other side, and pull out the needle from the coding which penetrated, and then return it to that coding and stitch the extremity of the spleen which is on the other side with this extremity of the marrow; and pull out that one from the coding which is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Make one poultice and another, and make one poultice in addition to another poultice, so that you cover all that is defective according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of sewing is that you cover with a sewing of pellicies in which you sew the skins, so that you also make a poultice on the extremity of the codena, and that you place another poultice until the wound is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	More, the second special kind of its own sewing, which Galen specifically mentions, and this is to be recommended by him and for him, is that you make a second similar thing with which all medicines are sewn, so that they add one part to its comparative part in what is convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of another of it and the extremity of the treated to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take the needle and fix it at the extremity of the thread to your proportion of the defective part, and make it penetrate the inner part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the stitch; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the stitch.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then return the rolled-up sleeves, and make each of the parted areas from the inner part penetrate to the outer part in two extremities of the mirror image on the opposite sides that are in the contrary flank.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common suture, it is the suture about which I mentioned earlier in memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more I say to you, the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, it is that you will insert in these each one a thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle from that which you have, and make this penetrate to the other side according to the suture of those who sew the guts together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More the judgment of the treatment of a wound is a judgment of the other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you touch the recent wound with your blood before it dries, altering it, and returning the intestine and sewing it and adapting it properly, then put on it a powdery dressing to promote flesh growth.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause on that tender spot and apply such things to your presence so that they make hard skin and cauterize the veins, and let them consolidate and be treated; and treat that wound just as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if your medicines are not present, then pause on that spot for a while, because it starts to throw out arm, cut away the dead skin, and change the dressing twice a day, just as you have instructed, until it is healed, since you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound will communicate its lesion to the principal members, then take a woolen cloth and submerge it in oil of tempered quality, or in rosated oil, and apply this to the circuit of the places that are between the ankles and knees.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestinal bowels, because many times this happens, then anoint it with a black styptic medicine, and especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and makes penetrating ulcers into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one which is of the large intestine is of easier cure than the one which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of it that is in those, and the subtlety of the body of that one, and the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Maybe if that which proceeds from the wound is the tissue, and you obtain it recently, return it according to your rule with which you reduce the intestines inwardly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Perhaps if it has passed to the tissue and already becomes green or black, then you stretch that with a thread over the area that is stained by it, so that there come flows of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the thread hanging from the part of the wound outside of it, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it, owing to the release of the tissue and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it be restored in some men, for I have seen one who was wounded in his own belly with a thrust of a lance and it was a wound of the right part of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and came out of it feces and swelling.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore we shall pursue the cure of what has already been begun, so that it is not confused in the healing, but rather we shall subtly introduce what focuses on healing and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And we have applied and seen the area already consolidated, then put on the patient what is to be applied for the accidental evil in their own belly; and do not apply anything for that evil accident, but rather let them rest in their own will, eating and drinking, and return to bathing and exercise in their own words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already said some experimented that when you apply a patch on the intestine, and it is small, then it is necessary to be tied in this manner: and it is that you take thread-like strings of large stitches; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those strings with its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; thus when you pull on them and tighten their mouth, the head of it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then put another string near the first one, and do not stop applying strings until you have applied as many as there are in the entirety of the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that and close the wound; and let those attached stitches remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, since it is sharper than a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of this thread of intestine, and it be very delicate, and return the extremity of it to the thread of the intestine, enveloped, and then insert that thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of sewing with fingers is not but according to a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it is not an engineering but a subtlety, and it is not a healing of it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and chronic, and it becomes an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and it takes a long time and it is not separated, however, universally it is named fistula and we call that one azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a calloused, hard, and white nodule, to which there is no pain and it is accustomed as it is accustomed to the pain of hearing; and for this reason it is named that ulcer "pena", that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in certain humid places, which cause sweating; and for this reason the humidity is dried up in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some times this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, that I call wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is in the naked flesh, is not so except for one of nine causes: of which one is or for lack of blood in the body; or for malice of it; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing nativity of flesh; or because it is of moved leg; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid and the matter that is in it is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in the cure of it; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or for property of region thus as it happens in Saragossa, in which difficult digestion of illnesses is made, and delayed healing of apostema by nature; or because in it there is a bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Already I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is suitable for you to know the treatment of fistula, which is made by way of operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the composite joints made up of the hand and foot; and of these, some give proximity to the main member and resemble it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore one of these fistulas that follows this manner is among the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and its occupation is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if one of the fistulas is of such depth that it does not reach to the places that have been said, and you have hope and confidence in its treatment, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, then inquire about it with the probe.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a lead probe, because lead, due to its lightness and flexibility, follows and bends according to the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has caused horrible motions, it is not possible for you to make signs on the patient with a tent.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, purify the openings through their respective openings, because the humidity by which you will purge that one goes to the other openings and corrects them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if there is a bone or nerve here, and whether the fistula's cavity is long and deep, or if it is a fistula with many openings and this is above all at the sum of your strength, at your penetration, at which you penetrate the patient, and the invention of pain through your compression on the area, and judgment of the signs and of the accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established yourself firmly on all these causes with a steady gaze, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near the surface or in a salty place, or one of joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what has been said about the narration of it, and remove that which is in this filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh, or of the heel and of the similar things, and cure that which is inside until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is following the rectum, then it is necessary to insert this into the wound as much as you can, and carefully remove all corrupted flesh; and administer hot poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have previously understood with an iron instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And make that some poultices are placed inside so that the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula, from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh so that it will be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is a bone and you are certain of this, then you should inquire into it and cut it according to what we have recommended, if you do not hinder any cause of a vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered by you and there is some corruption or necrosis in it, then scrape that until all the corrupted part is removed; and then treat it with what will heal the flesh so that it will be healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the arm is thus as before, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover with great care and scrutiny the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong tie, and then restore that which is proper.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, that's good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep and lengthy part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in this case it is not cunning but to leave that alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to reach it, then you will reach it with subtle and gentle forces which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully carry out the extraction of all those, and do not leave any one of them behind for any reason due to your lack of strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	More so if you encounter opposition from some cause of humidity, and in their treatment there is no fear or mistake, then cut through those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	More so if you are not prepared to reset the bones at that time, then place a dressing on the wound which will soothe the wound, and leave it until it is near the bones, flesh, and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section that you have cut in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Habantz, if you fear, place a poultice on the submerged wound with olive oil, or submerged in Egyptian wine, or in an ointment of green plants, because when those limbs are purified, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and from that attraction the alleviation is eased.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	More often if it is a large wound similar to the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the skin, then scrape only the surface with a raspatory tool until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	More often if that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and to cut into the area where the corruption has spread, and then treat that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which helps a man with his thigh, so that you place a similar and auxiliary device on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There is a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and of the internal parts most affected it is especially the matter within the body where the matter has reached the thigh, and it is a matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and not from an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then they extend the time for that error of doctors until the abscess is opened, and a gathering of its putrid matter, and its cure is delayed until the fistula is formed, and made in the rotten mouth are the things that all took away filth and humidity from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the multitude of doctors gathered around for two years, and did not put faith in those remedies but in the skill, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the fistula of it and the matters that flowed from it through those rotten holes with great force; and already the body of that man was completely corrupted and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and passed it through to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and examined all the openings and found that they led to a cavity within, from all parts of the fistula.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised above one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found that corruption, and it was already decayed and rotten and discolored; and a part of the fistula had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I will show you how to prepare and uncover that which was previously hidden from me regarding the bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I will investigate whether it is not in the bone but that corruption which I will cut away and uncover, and I had already destroyed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I will apply the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I will treat and uncover again the bone, building upon the initial discovery, and I will apply a continuous corruption to the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will uncover that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I will make a perforation for the purpose of curing it and restoring it, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I will discover on the other side and will not cease to make the small bone fall apart bit by bit, particularly and make a perforation for its restoration, and it is not restored until I have made an incision around a palm of it, and that which I extract from its marrow, and then I will restore with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on it and its section except for the disposition of its fragility and for the lack of tolerance of it and fear of death, because acidity comes to it at all hours due to an excess of evacuation of bad syncopy.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore healing is for whole health, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and the arrangement of it in the body is good and returns its virtue; and it is changed into its dispositions and does not make contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If there is a prominent bone in the body that has been injured, then it is necessary that you splint that bone in this manner: and it is that you take a bandage and tie it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it over its parts; and place that bandage made of wool thicker than the first bandage; and apply that bandage over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and stretch the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the areas beneath, and you uncover the flesh around the area where you want to make an incision so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And put a cloth or board beneath the bone properly, because when you do that, it is not prohibited for the saw to cut through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted area little by little, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, force the sawing from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then one part is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it; then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and you stop the blood flow, and you cut that from the first part where the corruption is until the cutting of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the cutting be small according to the place of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the bone but in the ligament.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or of the foot, it is most difficult; however, it is that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and you show it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and with a straightened ligament, when it does not cause you discomfort or numbness.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know that the cutters and the saws to cut these bones are suitable according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of them, and the hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of equipment convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation refers to your expertise on the subject of the instrument you have studied; when you have great knowledge and understanding of the techniques of this art, and evidence of techniques for treating illnesses, then you already have the means to apply what is convenient for each illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will be forming at the end of this chapter the names of the instruments which you will use with simples, and with which you will proceed to your examination, which you will conduct on the other cases.
Forma de serra:	Shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of yet another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rasp be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be according to the shape of the aforementioned points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless the ends of those are rubbed against the joints when they are swollen, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a larger razor for the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another properly made saw: let it be made with an arched back and the sharpness of iron, and its handle well-made in wood.
Forma de lu:	Shape of the body
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the roots in which there is a hollow or cavity.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of the root or another subtle thing/form.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another root of a curved extremity.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small root resembling a tendril or thread.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of a cutter with which the bones are cut.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting instrument.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting instrument; this one resembling a saw, and the extremity of it is like a serrated edge, and it is shown in many places in the root of the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a saw that suits the root of the one that has holes in the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covers all the causes that we have said about roots and cutters and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are putrefied either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you yourself medicate that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not help, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it covers that you cut that member within that bone where the corruption has reached, so that the patient escapes from death or evil which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the signal of that which happens to him, is that the member becomes black until it seems that fire has already consumed it, or one places on it a plaster made from a certain black substance that penetrates into that member and takes hold of the entire body; thus cut away the affected part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous sources, such as from a scorpion, a viper, or a rue plant, and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the said member, then you cut away the member and do not give space to the corruption so that it may not spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it happens to the hand, then you cut away that which is near the wrist, and do not give space to the corruption so that it takes hold of the wrist of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it swells up, then cut away the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption and swelling reach the elbow, then it is mortal for the patient; and to administer another remedy in treatment is a matter of great virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if corruption swells up the toe of the foot, then you cut away that part up to one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take in the sole of the foot, then you inject all of the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	More pain if it enters into the tooth, then you inject the leg into the joint of the tooth.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already spread to the tooth, then it is not an injection but a dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The technique of injecting the member or of sewing it, is that you stretch the ligament at the partition where you want to inject, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the partitions where you will inject, and extend the minister another ligament on them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that the spatium is entered where all the flesh is discovered; and then it is injected or sewn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And let a cloth be placed over the limb of all parts so that it does not touch the area itself, and let the adjusted lesion and cauterized aposteme come to the patient.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	More if you stop the flow of blood when working, then you cauterize the place gently, or apply to them some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the affected limb with a bandage in a convenient manner, and cure whatever is inside that needs healing.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which relieves a man in his gouty foot, this remedy is an accident that I and you have recommended, which is why it occurs to the black bile in the foot with adjustment that was assembled from combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption occurs primarily in the said interior where the entire foot tends.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for medicine so that the cure goes to the member with the violence of what attacks with pain and adjustment, and it affects that foot inside the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time occurs to him that corrupted disease in the said part of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then comes to me, and it is necessary for me to report that surplus with what I pause on the hand of medicines, after the purification of his body; and not is rejected the surplus but begins to go to the other part where it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And it pleases me to affect his hand, and I do not want to do that thing concerning the rejection of that surplus, and more than I fear the cutting of his dead hand, because the virtue of the disease was about evacuation.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And then he departed from me, returned to his land, and came back to me with the prepared and instructed hand of that man, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this narrative is not added except to be an aid concerning what is said about this disease, and that it may be a signification for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of sins and the quality of purging with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses form on certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it breaks and perforates, and the blood comes out, and the place is left empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it is like a thin cloth, and it does not reach to the deranged corruption, nor does it impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But it's worse if the space is prolonged until the corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that you cut out the entire skin as it is revolted, and especially when it is made thin and like a cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	More if you hope that the cecum adheres and that corruption has not been achieved by bad sequence, and in the cecum there is excrement of feces, then cure him with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that is of foul odor, then clysterize him with Egyptian medication which is of oil and bitter vinegar and ginger receiving divided portions, and being adjusted in a vessel, and being applied to the focus until the medication makes a flow and comes to the spit of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take of him the water that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize it in his sinus, and strengthen his orifice, and let the medicine be in him for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that thing with precision; and do it for as many days until the sinus is cleaned and the foulness is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is clysterized with water of cinder, when the medication is not present; and it is that you take the cinder of vinegar, and put it in the water; and then mix that and clysterize him with it until you confirm that the sinus is stopped.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of cinders, then administer a cluster with water and honey mixed with ground ginger, and administer it with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it soothes and cleans, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and constipation in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do those washings and you confirm that the sinus has already been healed, then administer a cluster with water that makes the flesh in it grow again.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And take plasters of diaphonic ointment and dissolve them with rose oil and astringent wine; or administer clusters with some medicines and other plasters that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on plasters.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow where the cannula of the cluster cannot be received, then you will enlarge it with a small iron, little by little, and apply to it a hot poultice wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is large, then you will bring together the lips of it with a suture and lessen the quantity in which the cluster is introduced.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the patient from which the arm emerges is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area in the pus and base location where it is in the patient for which the arm curves inward, because when the arm is constricted in the depth of its own flesh, it becomes engendered within.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the environment of the bone and base according to your wishes, then prepare the member with preparation for which the arm emerges gently according to what is apparent and that nothing should be retained in it, any cause of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied to the sinus conveniently according to what you want to extend, and place those on a piece of linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity as to cover the entire sinus; and then insert into the orifice of the sinus through the right foramen a large enough hole, a little one that is not larger than the orifice of the sinus; and then spread on another linen cloth of the healing ointments according to the size of the hole, and place it over that position longitudinally in relation to the orifice of the sinus so that the discomfort of the patient's arm is alleviated and do not press the cloth too hard but rather lift it up a little at a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	More often that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which you should cleanse every hour so that it comes to be adjusted in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if that which flows from the arm is movement or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And then you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is thrown on the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or taking adherence, then you may touch it with your hand on the third day, and when you touch the wound, then change the dressing for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there comes a subtle and thin pus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it is near, because just as in some wounds there is slow generation of flesh in the wounds, and in those in which the opposite is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for many days there comes indigested arm matter, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust with desiccation of the medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried like ointment of diafinion, when there is adjusted a surplus of addition of excess.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most effective remedy for which it is treated, is that you take a plaster of resin and dissolve it in heated rose oil, and apply it to the affected area with an antique ointment of its substance, and bind it tightly to the body, and use it as a poultice.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, take the resin plaster, as much as it is possible to thicken, and use it; or take myrrh and wool and ashes, and pound all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and bind it tightly with a cloth and tie it on the skin; and bind that which you have thickened on the honey, and powderize on a cloth and tie it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some treated areas are given aristolochia, roots of heavenly lilac (that is, heavenly lilac) and flour of centaury, and use those simple or adjusted, pound them and sift and powderize over the honey which has been recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sickness is prolonged, and it is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the patient's abdomen, and it has already spread to the bones or to the other hard members or to the ligaments; then you will cure it with a fistular treatment, as it is said previously.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of ailing nails and worn-away finger ends and the cutting of additional fingers and the division of toes.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess which begins on the nail of the thumb or big toe, and also appears on other fingers, and as it progresses its treatment is highly regarded, or it is cauterized with a hot iron, or it becomes corrupted, and releases a discharge that corrodes the root of the nail, and then corrupts the entire nail, and then perforates the bone beneath which has a foul odor, and forms an ulceration on the outer layer, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And then when you have that wound which we mentioned in the division and do not trust its treatment, then it is necessary that you remove with iron all the excess material that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound properly, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already penetrated the quick of the finger, and begin to cause pain and damage, then it is necessary that you apply a subtle remedy under the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and gently raise it and remove it with ease, and apply on that which remains of the flesh medications that burn and corrode, so that it be completely removed; and properly treat that wound with ointments until it be healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, because no time is a healthy one in which the corrupted bone remains in the body.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption increase in the finger, then you incise that one in one of the nodes according to where its memory is pressed, and then heal it from the inside until it is healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail receives a blow or an injury, and it causes severe pain in that area, then it is necessary that you begin by applying a poultice to the patient, and immediately dry the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting transversely upwards, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh beneath the nail, because you would cause the patient severe pain, and this could lead to the growth of superfluous flesh in the area; and then heal that place with a remedy that calms the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But said joint is one that is born in the hands of some men, for it is all flesh, and it is also found in the bones, or it is found in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the growth of them in certain nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Worse than that which is born in the bad nights of the said sickness is not, and that which is born in the joints hurts more.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy growths, the section is lighter, and it is that you should cut their root with a spatula to the side.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Worse than that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the amputation of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Worse in that which is born in the said nights of the sicknesses, it is that you should cut at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then sew with one of those convenient sewings suitable for this, and then cure that which will be sanitized.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Worse the consolidation that occurs to the said things between their rotten parts or by nativity of the man who is born in this way, or by consolidation of the wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance, therefore it is that you should cut that consolidation so that the said things return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between the dregs of the said things with oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated as it is fitting.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of bad habits, they are variable.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Bad habits are variable, and they are swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities which come to the extremities of the body, and their main occurrence is in the thighs, mainly in the thighs of travelers and laborers and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, we suggest that you administer a purge of the body for black bile with some gentle evacuations, and then let blood from the patient's basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that the bad habit should be cut out and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and everything extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this method: at the beginning, wrap the thigh with hot water until the gross blood is dissolved, which is purging the thigh, and then tightly bind the patient's thigh to the upper part of the hip, inside the navel, with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with the hand that holds the lower part of the thigh, upwards and downwards, until the quantity of blood that you want is discharged, and which the strength of the patient can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply that, and command the patient to abstain from foods that cause black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And proceed with the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this does not help the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: you raise the patient's leg, if it can be moved by itself, and then put it in a bath and wrap the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then make an incision on the right of the vein for drainage in the loin or in the back of the elbow, or at the lowest part of the elbow, near the joint.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the cord with an incision and purge the vein from all parts until it becomes apparent to feeling, and it is necessary for the appearance of what seems to be a dark or black vein declining.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then as you remove from the cord, you will see that white thing which is called a ligament.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then put your hand under the limb until it is elevated and separated from the cord, and suspend it with a bandage or sling.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section, and then cut that section for three days, and then scratch the skin of the affected part of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it in the last section of the heel, and then extract it and lift it until it is ejected through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And make it so that you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all sections, until everything is ejected; then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey to extract and lift, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce the tool and turn your hand in every direction until it is discharged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted, for if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to lift it and it will come out on the patient because of that nuisance.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when it is all discharged, then apply on the place of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil, both raw and refined, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vita is constricted having twisted the area which is enveloped by the partitions, and it's not according to rectitude as we have said, then it's necessary that you make fents on that entire partition of twisting of it and on the areas of envelopment of it, and return that suspended with an ointment entering so that you elevate that entire.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not cut the vein and that you do not harm it, for it would be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your discretion in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision by which the vita is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a pointed iron (or possibly " Shape of an orphaned claw" but more
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharp-edged like the points nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; but rather it has a surplus of coarseness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in cold lands, just like in the land of Arabia and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is of putrefaction that comes from the decay, just as worms and snakes and lizards are generated between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of its reception is from this vein that violently inflames the leg; and then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to come out from the place of that blister, which seems like a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, it is good that you wrap around that limb a piece of lead weighing one or two drachms, and anoint that with, and let the suspended lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see that something is coming out of it, wrap it in lead and anoint that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the movement is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that root until it is completely out, because if you incise it, it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and pus in the area and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it is good that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and no part of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it exits in some men who are in their length of 5 palms and 10 toes, and it has already reached me that it exits one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the needle into the hole of it and perforate that long channel through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that place for the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein, in some occasions, has many branches, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with many openings, and it exits from each opening a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat that thus as we have said in the division and with the things that are mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section concerning worms generated under the skin, and it is called cattle disease or cow sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some lands near us as cattle sickness, because many times it appears in the animals and it is a worm which is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and swelling, and it shows itself to our feeling with a bad smell from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of it is from the putrefaction of certain humors, thus as accidents occur with worms and serpents and intestinal worms and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly attacks the man, and enters and destroys the brain, and this brings forth vile and visible signs.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you first prepare the sensitivity and appearance of it to the feeling, and then take care that you strongly hold what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and place a dry plaster on it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deep in the flesh and you cannot touch it, then apply a cautery with fire on the place where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see that it has reached the head near the brain, then bind strongly above the eyebrow with a tight bandage, and apply a dry plaster on it, and extract it; and take care that the patient uses purging of their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guards himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the cutting regarding the ailment of the naval area.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This sickness is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And already I have seen that thing which I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the venous fold of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation move thus as it went increasing to this point, moreover with a more pleasant sensation than being painful, thus as if it were silver seen flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put the needle in the pain of that place and fixed it in the muscle, and then I left it there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I ran to the other side of the body into which I passed to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the body according to what I had seen; and it was very marvelous of the permutation of it and of the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this beforehand in my wells according to that manner, however I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	More pain is not seen with these humors than in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And it is not thought to be because of this, but rather that it is due to the fact that the woman is of fragile constitution and with uncovered veins, and in this appearance the distorted swelling reveals the sentiment.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it not appear according to this curvature in those who are delicate and have a body with humid veins that are weakened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to them as we have said, but rather press strongly on that spot and place a dry and tight dressing over the area where the swelling is constricted, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	More if you do not clean the ulcers with the tongs, then cure that one with a discharge from the body and with this that expels swollenness, and remove those foul pills and pills of serape and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrowheads.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to their species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt, and solid ones; and some have three angles, and some have barbs; and some have a tail.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the passions in which there are two manners: for the principal members or organs, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, and the lungs, the kidneys, the intestines, the bladder, and their similarities; and thus when you cut into one of these members and find signs of death, which causes you to recount and return to your senses, then beware that you avoid extraction of that arrow in those in which death is imminent in the major dispositions, and when it does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the wound, it is when the arrow cuts into the flesh, and pierces the bone, and there comes out from the siphus, which is above the brain, for there occurs through the violent concussion, and scotomia, and vertigo, and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly impaired and the voice is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the wound a white humidness resembling a poultice, and it seems that the flesh is affected by the proximity of the carnification.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And thus if this appears to you in this way, then abstain from the treatment and from the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	More signs of the arrow when it enters the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems that it is fixed in a hard cause, and not a hollow cause; and indeed the movement of the arrow resembles the movement of the pulse, and the coldness of the wound is black, and dry, and chilled, and tremors; and thus know that death descends from all over.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectoration of foamy blood from the wound, and the veins that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great amount of cold breath, and demand attraction of cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow falls in the membrane which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made with great and vehement pain and sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow falls in the stomach, then forth comes from the wound a green and undigested matter.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is in the stomach, and it's fixed in it, there will be some wound or tear in the fabric, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for a cure except for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is in the bladder, and urine comes out of it, and because of this some cause comes to the parts before, and for him there is severe pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the ribcage, and the hip, and the leg and their similar parts, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you understand by this about your own cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	For this reason, if an arrow hits a man in the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and you extract it from the other side, leaving the grey matter of the brain intact, he will be healed, and no harm will come to the brain.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	He extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into his eye socket, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be retrieved except for a small extremity to which it adhered to his bone, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, made of iron in which there were no wings.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew fainted, and did not happen to him any worse accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had fallen into his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had wings; and then he sat down on that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the man's throat; and then he was very skilled with that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his belly, and they thought that he would die from it; and then, after thirty days passed and there was no change in him regarding any of the causes of his condition, he sat down on the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no worse accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and after he had been treated for seven years, the arrowhead remained at the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I see a woman in whom an arrowhead is lodged in her belly, and the wound is consolidated within her, and it does not change its position or location, and the woman does not suffer discomfort in some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I see another man in whom an arrowhead is lodged in his face and the wound is consolidated, and the arrow breaks, causing little pain, and showing few symptoms of this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes that was lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to his treatment because of the lodging of the arrowhead that had entered within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrowhead very tight; and then I probed it with a subtle thread, and did not feel it; but when I touched his right ear, he felt pain, and then I suspected that this point was due to the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplastrum in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place would show me where the arrowhead was, so that I could cut above it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it does not happen by chance in the location of the accident that the arrow has reached that place; and you continue with the plaster on them for many days and it does not happen by chance; and the wound is consolidated meanwhile, and the patient frees themselves from the extension of it for a space of many days until one day they feel the arrow inside their nose and touch it with their hand.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you will place on the wound acute corrosive medicine for many days until it is opened, and with the probe you will test that, and you will extract the extremity of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the fist.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you will adjust in the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and you will pass to me time with that for the space of time until four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will manipulate that, and do not obey excess, then you will not cease to subtly contrive and engineer on that with skills of engineering, until one day you will climb with those skills of engineering, hanging them with forceps and descent, made in various ways, as will be seen in the form of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but if it is restored and the wound is consolidated, then the patient is cured by complete health, and nothing else can harm them in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain sayings for which pauses are made on this rule and significance about what has not been said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended by narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsman compares little with regard to motion; and what is present with what is absent; and finds new operation and new instrument for the descent of the strange causes of the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members in which they are lodged, but rather in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which it enters; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is ejected through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding to a fleshy place, and is attracted and ejected.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the evacuation at the time when you take it, then it is good that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and the attraction of it and its ejection are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your efforts, then leave it for several days and return to it with attraction and friction every day, and already it will be dislodged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your efforts for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire affected part with a subtle taravel until the area of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and many of those accidents occur which I have said and spoken, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it until the blood is purified for several days; because if the arrow reaches the ciphalic region, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the ciphalic region, and the patient stays for several days, and none of those accidents occur, then you should work on attracting the arrow and attracting him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	More often if it is deeply fixed and does not obey your extraction, then you administer taravels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and carefully treat the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the part of the body, and it is lodged in a sensitive area, then you inquire about that sensation, and if you feel it, then remove it with instruments suitable for the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins, then make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it has reached the ears, on which it is held, then cut the flesh in which it is embedded with all the skill you can; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until you obtain obedience.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use your hand with twisting and force on all parts until it makes that obey; and be subtle with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and so that it is made difficult to attract it and to extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that at your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circle of it can be cleansed, and then return to it when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you find an opposite condition of blood flow, then administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingeniously in all manner possible to you the evasion of the arrow; and do it with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as you have recommended and advised.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then make the arrowhead contract so that the patient is in accordance with the figure, according to which you previously mentioned the removal of the arrow from them, which is most juvenile.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrowheads that are thrust outward by the opposite of the other party, or which already proceed from it to the outer parties, or which make the extremity of the arrowhead visible by sensation of the part most disposed to the propounded and vexed codena, and times when that is imminent; then you cut upon that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forces take hold; and then draw out that, for it is made lighter by extraction.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the lamina according to the opposite condition under which the arrowhead presses into the bone, and increase the measures, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for some days, and then return to insert it into what will be.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the head of the arrow is in it, then you should push it out with your hands.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	More if the head has fallen and you want to administer an injection, then introduce and put in it, if it is numb, push with a blunt instrument so that it enters the cavity of it into the body of the arrow and then push it out with your hands.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	More if the arrow is curved, then you should push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is loosened by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then take care to remove all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then treat it with what is suitable.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near so that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to cut above it, then cut above it and beware of injuring a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then dress the wound if it is indicated, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forces where the arrows are directed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The extremities of their body are like a bird's beak which is made when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these are made many special treatments, large, small and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its poverty, and of the width of the wound, and of the constitution of the patient.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of an implant concave to this hollow extremity thus as the beak of a bird so that it relieves the pain of the arrow in him, and pushes away the dullness:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of an implant for a dull extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus as a rod so that it relieves the inside of it in the arrow's concave and is implanted with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, in which it is customary to perform phlebotomy, of the ones that are in the head 16, there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, I mean the temples; and two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes that are called aspicientes; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	In the veins that are swollen in the arms, there is one called cephalica, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's also called the middle vein, and it's composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalica; and the people call that one "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is in the domestic lettuce, and it's named "citillar", and the commoners call it "the vein of the belly"; and there are funis of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's the one that appears swollen, and it's the one that appears on the skin by manifest appearance; and salvatella, which is the vein between the ear and the little finger, and there are two branches in it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is the one that is at the curvature of the knot of the wild lettuce; and the second is the sophena, and its place is at the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is at the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The junction of the veins that are near the ears is affected by chronic catarrh, and emigration, and sahafati, and ulcers of the bad head, which are ancient evils.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what you have recommended to me: it is that the head of the patient should be raised, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occipital area where the two veins are located with a warm and gentle friction; then tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that the ears and the areas around them appear; and seek that vein with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of that vein with your finger, then try to stop it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical knife, and it is the one that is inserted, and then insert it into the vein in the cubital fossa so that blood flows from the opening.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then elevate your hand with the vein and the cubital fossa to the separated parts and make an incision in the vein with an incident cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width, or about that; and let as much blood come out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tie with a poultice and bind it so that it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the beginning of the book, I have discussed the incision of those things and also their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, youth of phlebotomy is an ancient immigration and badly governed and assiduous eye disease and body of acute superfetations poured out to the senses.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy on those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's vein with a tight bandage so that the two veins appear at the sentiment by apparent manifestation and it is demonstrated by the pulse of their arm; then you will feel it with your fingers.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the needle above the vein to the divided parts of the arm, and insert the phlebotomy needle, and raise the vein in its place; and cut that one just as you did on the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constraint of the patient, and place your arm on the vein for an hour, and then place a poultice on that cut and strengthen it with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the memory of them has been preceded, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the treatment.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments and for migraines, soreness, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient holds their arm with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the prominent point which is at the head of the lancet on that vein and strike it with a pin or other metal in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then release the pressure from the patient and hold it tight so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some times it is opened with lateral phlebotomy, however it is not suitable that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity like the others phlebotomies, but rather of broad extremity, and perform this one according to the transverse, because the bone is prominent and the tendon is strong in it, when the phlebotomy is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More importantly the treatment of the two veins that are like the lachrymal veins of two eyes for scabies of the eyes and soreness and boils in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should hold the collar of the shirt with one bandage, and then apply the bloodletting instrument to those areas, and you stand over the head of them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let bloodletting be done according to the transverse length of a little bloodletting instrument, little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting instrument is subtle, then the extremity of them is cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make the blood flow as much as is necessary to you, and stop on those cuts, and hold them for a night, and then dress those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More, the bloodletting of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and for violent cough, and for the ailments of the face and migraine and pain that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting of them is that the patient should hold the collar and then put the collar of their nose on your left hand, and take the subtle bloodletting lancet and place it in the middle place of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow at once.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Take care that you touch your hand to the bloodletting instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your necessity; and then dress it for a night, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	More often the treatment of phlebotomy of the veins guides to a contraction of the skin and a beginning of leprosy and to mottoes diseases and putrid and malignant corrosive ulcers, as with herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds each one in their hand with a ligature; and let the artisan be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then phlebotomize the vein at the length with a small and ample phlebotomy, little by little; then extract blood in a tempered quantity or according to what is needed, that is to say according to necessity; and then do the same on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the ligature and hold both veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not suffocated, and let him go to bed because the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins relieves small aposthema and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the region of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck with a bandage, and then turn out their lips and look at both veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of them, and this is more evident because in the region of those there are thin black veins; and then make an incision on each one by incident incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt in you, and you do not know which of these it is, then understand the most serious incision of them, and the most manifest one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a similar thing to the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Moreover, it is customary to incise the two veins that are in the upper lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Moreover, the cutting of the two veins that are under the tongue is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic, which is preferred for afflictions in the throat, for the disease of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that it follows the disease between your hands in front of the patient, and raises the patient's tongue, and observes behind the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not cut your hand while phlebotomizing them, because behind them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are in the ones where it is customary for all men, and their phlebotomy is done according to two methods: either they put on the phlebotomy a martyr or olive to subtlety declining; or they apply to the phlebotomy a lancet, and call it "alnessil", and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this necessity suits the section and those specific, wide and subtle threads according to the abundance of the veins and according to the tightness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of bloodletting through a cut in a vein:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the thread of the same size pass through as many times, and it is suitable to open the concave veins that are full and apparently thick, and also those that contain thick blood or pus.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive-bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser width and of more subtle extraction, and it suits the bloodletting of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus-like blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Most of the treatment of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts the blood of the illnesses that are on the left side and the colon, and also that which affects the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the bloodletter, when performing that bloodletting, to be careful with that and to be in fear of that, because there is an artery nearby, and if he makes a mistake and hits the wrong spot in the puncture of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause an outflow of blood, so that it is necessary not to perform bloodletting with a pointed instrument, but rather with one that is blunt.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through obvious examination, then it is necessary that you leave that one and move to another, or search for a certain branch of the vein, or make an incision in place of the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and perform that incision with careful consideration, as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform a venesection on the middle arm, then it is necessary to tighten the band above the arm so that you touch the place where you constrict the area of the pulse, and put a needle on the inner tender part; and tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision in a careful manner as we have said; and beware that the percussion does not hit any space near the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with the ligature strained, an inflammation in the place where you have made the incision on the tender part, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore evacuate that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the venesection like the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you should know that it is arterial blood; and then take and hold your finger on it for a long space; and put your finger on it, and if the blood is separated, because many times it is separated, then tighten the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Watch over the patient's urine, and be fearful of it, and do not touch that for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood does not stop, and you think that medicine is not present, then you will cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of theirs is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or you will take a string of thread, and make a ligature, and take one bandage and tie it tightly over the place of the vein with strictness and with pulvils between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that with the treatment of which it was previously mentioned to remind the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of their blood is difficult in many situations due to the small place of the wound and the possibility of loosening of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is a procedure that removes blood from the subordinate part of the head and the right part of the body; for this reason it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And warn the one who performs phlebotomy to be afraid of that in the phlebotomy, because there is a nerve; and therefore if they make an adjustment in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hit the nerve, it will cause them stupor, and the healing of them will be difficult, and it will be hard for them to be completely healed. And this nerve appears many times to feeling; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, then warn that you should place the phlebotomy with which you perform phlebotomy with care to avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then make a cut in the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And consider this specially, if you want to perform phlebotomy with an olive stick or myrtle stick; for it is the safest of all veins, since there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	It is more advisable for you to perform phlebotomy that you be careful with the lancet so as not to puncture only the head of the vessel, and seek the easiest location, and do not touch it unless it has been confirmed by the primary percussion that there are some emptinesses in that area where the phlebotomy is being performed.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, it often happens to some men that when they are not subjected to phlebotomy in the primary percussion, there is no touching of that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy of that one and its accidents are so many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of it and caution of the occurrence of ailments, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, median and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter after eating, when there appear signs of repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let a phlebotomy be done on the third day or first hour after three hours have passed from the beginning of the journey.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more phlebotomy is administered, the more it causes convenience and necessity for that, either at night or during the day, at all hours and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is known that if a child is under 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month or seventh, and the elderly should not be phlebotomized who have already passed 61 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be phlebotomized in any manner, it is known that one must cleanse the intestines beforehand with a flebotomy or an enema, if there is retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and so that they do not reach the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are nauseous, or have diarrhea, or a craving, nor should they be phlebotomized if they have a disease or a fever until it has been reduced in them, nor those with dropsy, and more so because phlebotomy is to be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and multiplication of cough and fatigue and exercise of fasting or vigils and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible for that person.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or it is excited by some exercise so that the blood is thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the phlebotomy on them in the vein of the arm, around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that the arm of that person be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as turmoil and excessive grief and concern for them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in their presence, make the causes known through the use of that which customarily belongs to men with aromatics and fragrance and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the one performing the phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the blood from the arm, and let the phlebotomy doctor touch it with their hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if it is a tempered narrowing, because the narrowing when it is not equal, or the narrowing is with excess, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then it prohibits the body from excessive blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then apply the narrowing, so that one who should be a bloodletter, rubs their hands together between them, so that the veins become inflated, and are declared to the sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bloodletter applies a little ancient oil to their lancet properly; and then places their right index finger on the vein, with their left hand holding the area where the bloodletting is desired, so that the vein swells a bit, and the percussion is calmed because of the veins which you find there like a cord, since the bloodletting makes them run, and of those it is full of air, and when you apply the lancet on that one, it is contracted before the bloodletting, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the lancet does not wound the vein, but if it does, it is a slight one.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, for this reason, it is necessary that the bloodletter be stopped and solicited in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then proceed with the phlebotomy, if the vein is exposed in a suitable area, it is good; and if not, you will make another incision in that location, or above the patient's arm, depending on whether the area is inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed, or the patient is prone to spasms, then leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, lest you aggravate the inflammatory abscess, nor enter into bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then proceed with the phlebotomy if the case requires it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and you fear that you will not be able to get the quantity of blood you want, then proceed with the phlebotomy in that vein according to the rule and adjust on the aperture a little stopcock, and make it with caution so that the area does not become inflamed, because an inflamed area is very bad for many men due to small aperture.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if the area has already become inflamed, then do not proceed with it, because it does not excuse any cause of yours; and apply to that affected part of the olive oil dressing, because it alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this case olive oil than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer a bandage of oil in the entire phlebotomy to which phlebotomies the veins are forbidden from the body's prohibition of blood, and make that theriaca with almond and sagenea when it is placed on one of those areas, because the blood is subtle and is revolted when it is coarse.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many times it happens, and mainly to that one who has not been bled but only this time, or in the vicinity of the little vein, then cut it, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warm, and hold for an hour, so that it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it happens that this is applied near the sentiment of the blood of that vein in agreement with it or with another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or greenish color remains in the area for some days, do not worry about it; and if you want, place on that area some cause of rosewater and of dissolved mirra, or some cause of mint juice or of chamomile or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times it happens that abscesses and swellings from phlebotomy of the basilic vein occur.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that area, and if you find a softness there, apply compression to it, for that prominence is bad and evil; and therefore be careful what you do to that area, because the flow from the arterial blood is strong.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster for that area where there is stiffness, so that the place becomes hardened, and then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take out of the blood everything according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that appears on the surface of the blood, as it seems.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then let it come out until it becomes thinned; and similarly if it is sharp, until the sharpness of it is blunted.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And take for the one who is full and strong and needs a blood extraction in a single vein, that phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and take out that which is extracted in many veins, and let the trachea be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is saved from flow of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is more useful and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to whom it is accustomed to happen syncopes after phlebotomy, and it is good that you cure that before the phlebotomy with a little of warm infusion of milgranas or simple oximel; and extract from the blood in three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a coldness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy an infusion of electuary of mirra or electuary of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or an electuary aromatized and of pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncopes occur after the phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issue of much blood, then it is good that you take in drinking water of flesh and electuary of subtle pleasant odor; and use aromaticity with almond, and anoint the chest with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to evacuate the blood from their arm and dissolve their second blood, take from them through phlebotomy for motivated evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to evacuate their arm, and shed their second blood, and if their body is strong, then do this close to the seventh or ninth hour of the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to attract the blood of their body against the area where it is declining, take that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already corrupted and it is sharp and causes fever, take that blood be shed from it in one sitting and let a great quantity of it be shed and let the perception be amplified until syncopy occurs, since you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on the pulse of the body where the blood flows, so that death does not occur in place of syncopy, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not attempt when you want to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract blood, that you press below with vehemence and the elbow is extended, because this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have the assistant make an incision so that it is a secondary bloodletting; or let this be done with the sharpness of the bloodletter that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place upon it tyriacal alum or sagenezene, and compress it with gentle compression so that the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then prick that spot on that location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "cord of the arm" is bloodletted in place of the cubital or basilic, when they are not blocked or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting of it is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water so that the vein becomes more visible and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tighten it over that limb with a moderate strictness; and make an incision following the transverse direction, not crosswise nor along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and let your incision be such that you make it above the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then put the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing the hand in warm water, and it is the same to soak the body of the blood in cold water in winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is less dangerous than all the other veins, because it has neither a pulsating vein, nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the incision of the little vein of the right hand is suitable for the illnesses of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the incision is that you hold the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, after you have put it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is demonstrated to the view; and then make an incision transversely; and if you cut it not at all, nothing will be felt in return.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to cut your hand during phlebotomy, because you will be close to the nerves of the dissected flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then immediately put your hand in hot water and let the blood flow in it, because if you don't do that with hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flux.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you apply oil and salt on the vein, so that it does not consolidate too quickly; and similarly you should do in all constricted veins.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More often the phlebotomy of the left hand is preferred to that of the right hand, as it is convenient for the diseases of the left side.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of the arm as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the vein that is chosen for phlebotomy is for the diseases that are on the left side of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and for the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and for similar things among the diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of the arm is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and make a friction on which the veins appear; and tie above the ankle joint with a cord; and in the place of the vein, the apparent vein that you see between the toes, and from it branches are spread out on the surface of the foot to the lower parts.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, I recommend a poultice on the infected area or place the leg in a warm bath to reduce the swelling of the wound, which is better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you apply a poultice on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath the surface of the foot, and place your poultice with the one by which you treat through the middle, as if you wanted to make an incision.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the poultices be visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and let the blood flow into a container until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the poultice applicator makes a mistake on the first dressing, then put the poultice on for a short time, because the place is sore; and do not fear the patient's pain, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do the same with the swelling of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is behind the heel and down to the hollow of the divided buttocks.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the junction of the poultice application is at the hip joint when it is for bloodletting.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that they enter into a bath, and tighten and strengthen the thigh of the patient from the side of the wide entrance under the heel under four fingers with a long subtle bandage, which does not appear except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, the fleubotomia is according to each engineer's ingenuity that is possible for you and according to the nature of the wound, which is better; or cut that by incision or section that by section, because the place of the patient is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many homes a remedy; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of everything, then the fleubotomia takes some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the said auricular and anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and pause over the place of the fleubotomia, cut and strengthen the place, because gentle handling is health.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of purging and of the qualities of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Purges are from hems, or from wormwood, or from verbena.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventozacio is performed according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventozacio without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventozacio without scarification is according to two methods, either with heat or without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventozas that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations on the body, among which one location where ventozas are placed is behind the ear, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location of the two parts of the neck together; and ventozas on the jaw below the mandible below the mouth; and ventozas of the two spallae; and ventozas of the spleen, which is at the end of the ribcage; and ventozas of the two axillaries, and they are of the two arms; and ventozas of the two hams; and ventozas of the two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And venozation does not extract blood, but rather from the thin veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not take effect through those, just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that venozation be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by excess, until the body is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If there is a need to provoke purging due to illness or continuously, we will administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This cause is why in some men the blood is multiplied inside them, which indicates a need for purging, and they find heaviness and swelling in their head; and of those it is that find fullness and pain in their face and head, and in their neck; and of those it is that find darkness and dimness in their face and forehead, and dullness in their senses; and of those who throw up the place of their purging; and of those it is that their laughter is multiplied; and of those it is that find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is infected and they spit blood; and of those it is that their sleep is multiplied, and of those who vomit blood while sleeping, pain and anguish and plague and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then we command purging to be done since two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is said that purging of the neck is when it relieves heaviness in the head and that which is poured into the senses; but we rather think that it should be evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this swelling is in the area of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use on him that which is of cold complexion, or in which there is catarrh, because it brings great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not suitable to use that on the old people, and on the heads of those who have cold maladies.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More to the one on whom it is continually applied, forgetfulness is caused; and for this reason, it is advisable that you command the swelling-reducer to put his hand a little while on the swollen area of the feet, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Greater swelling of alkahol is in the area of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilic vein: and for this reason, it is conducive to asthma, and to the constriction of the spleen and to the scission of the spleen's ligament, and to coughs, and to flatulence.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is advisable that the alkahol swelling be wrapped a little, because if it is touched by the feet, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the swelling of alhagdahan contributes to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and to migraines, and to forehead pain, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the area of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And tell the surgeon to press his hand with a scalpel so that he does not cut the artery and cause an outflow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the operation of the mouth includes the gum in the mouth, and the corruption of the gum, and the symptoms of the diseases that are in the mouth, and are in place of a surgical procedure for abscesses that are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More, the operation that is done on both spatulas includes the cupping, which is done for replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the operation of the two parts that are opposite the navel includes the cutting of the three veins, which are the basilica, cephalica and jugular, because it attracts the blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins so that the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And tell the surgeon to proceed with caution in the incision, because the area is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is an operation on which the operation is performed on the hips and includes the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are inside.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And tell the one who administers the treatment to make a large incision, and let it be of iron, for the location indicates a strong constriction; and strongly let the subtle purging incisions be made with a scalpel.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Lesser purging of the thighs is made with evident minuteness, for it attracts the blood from the whole body, and alleviates ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provokes the menses, and alleviates bothor and ademil; and they are in the place of flebotomy of two sophas, and of the ahorc, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	The emperor's remedy reaches the whole body and makes the syncopes accelerate in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the purgings of the ahorc, the youth is given to the youth by the purgings of two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the purgings is that it stops the purging at the beginning of the abscess and closes by a tempered suction, and does not prolong the position of the purgings, but rather raises them gently, and holds them quietly, and so that the humors come to the place by gentle coming.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened, swollen, and inflamed, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you will slowly and carefully extract a little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender flesh on his hips, beware that you do not scrape it once and for all, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bloodletter to amplify the scraping and to cut a little deeper, and then extract with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thickened, then beware that you scrape two times, for in the first scraping the path of subtlety to the blood and its thinning is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More so in the second (scraping) the acquired examination of the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then a third scraping should be done so that the dregs are cleared.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gently, when we want to extract a little blood, it is enough for us to scrape just a little.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will scrape with a deeper scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scrape with a deep scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scraping is where the depth of the vein is only as much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the patient's skin is thick, hard, and dark, and their pores are very tight, it is advisable to apply gentle, loosening, and resolving treatments to the areas of the veins; if it is summer, then use almond oil or violet oil, or melissa oil, or fig tree oil; and if it is winter, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or sandalwood oil, and apply these to similar symptoms.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the swelling is thick and cold, then the oil should be bitter almond, or balm of Gilead, or sweet almond oil, or anise oil, and apply it to similar cases.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More often if the wound has large pores with tender flesh, then it is advisable to prohibit oil, and it is advisable to apply to these wounds a lavation of warm water or cold water from a solvent, or water from a decoction, or water from borlago, and similar treatments for such cases.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose wound is of moist humidity, wash their wounds with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumach, and apply similar treatments to such cases.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose swellings are thick, wash their wounds with old wine, or water of sage, which is marjoram, or a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and apply similar treatments to such cases.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is desirable that the ventilation be kept away from the bath; also desirable is that it be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and desirable that one sleeps close to the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be governed by bloodletting before purification.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is desirable that you consider the beginning: then if the purifier or he who must be bled is bilious and has sharp and inflamed blood, then it is desirable that he takes cooling causes, such as milky sweets, endives, bitter and sour drinks, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give him food such as poultry, and meat of small game birds, and seasoned food with sour sauces, and similar things to him.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for one whose temperament is cold, it is desirable that he takes in drink honeyed electuary, or electuary of dried and seeded hemp, and sumac, and with pleasant smelling spices mixed with hot and warm; and it should be recommended to him to use moderation in drinking and eating, and give him food of poultry, rabbit, partridge, and small game birds.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is desirable that on the day of purification and bloodletting, the drink be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is suitable to give in drink, for certain hours to certain men, tyriac or alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is muskad, or to anoint the stomach or to perform a flebotomy or to apply, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtle; and it is not suitable to take that scaldfit.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The stomachs that are to be scarified are the ones that are placed under the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and the skin of the thigh, because these members do not suffer from scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but to attract blood from a member, just as we place a plaster on the breast in case of flux of blood of the nose; and we use that to dissolve cold viscosity of the member, just as we place it on the stomach and the navel; because that rarefies the member and scarifies it and brings down the pain when we resolve the viscosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed on the joints when there is opacity or pus, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the opacity and eradicates the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, it is done when a poultice is applied on the liver and the middle to reduce swelling in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these swellings are administered with juice alone; some treated areas are administered with heat from a fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some treated areas are filled with warm water in the illnesses of the abdomen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the swelling is filled and becomes larger, it is warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been cut and added.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	A warm poultice applied to the body: its thickness should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the plaster should be half a palm; and on its surface, in the area that is in the circuit, let its thickness be small enough so that a needle can enter it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of rough pumice stone or citrine, with coarse edges, lion, and thorns, so that it does not let the member move from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of pumice stone or iron, where a candle is placed at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this poultice be greater in size than the one we have recommended; and the smaller part of it according to the illnesses and the age of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The flatulence of elderly people and those who are thin is different from that of young people and those with large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of treating this flatulence with fire on the member is that it extends the stick with fire decently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place that over the middle of the transverse vein in the middle location of the flatulence, so that the fire is kindled around the affected part without burning the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And apply it to the member of the patient, and let it be on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have the flatulence and we indicate that they should let out the saying and the vapor should escape through that hole, then the flatulence will be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And ignite the stick according to its manner, and repeat this if you are indicated to do so by that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	There is also a type of flatulence that is administered in the disease of bladder problems, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or hole, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this flatulence, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many members except in the members where it's not possible to apply cups, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum and their surroundings; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the said nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloodletting cups in the armpits or the hollows of purified dust.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then let them be applied during the day and night in armpit water until they are hungry, and so that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and with cupping; and then let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and then let them be placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and fallen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place with a cup, it is better in judgment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with sour wine and then with hot water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged by the application of the bloodletting cups, and it is that which is overflowing, then you should put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place that on top until the flowing is diminished.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood is multiplied, then powder the vitriol trissat, or similar substances to the stiptic causes, until the blood is dried; or place the warm poultices of fava excocicated on the area, and leave them until the wounds adhere to the location, and the blood dries.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And see, if necessary, repetition of bloodletting, when it is possible to change those things.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle in the areas until blood comes out; and then apply poultices, for these when they feel some blood will adhere quickly.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, powder a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinder, and apply immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the project of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people mock this chapter, and those who for a long time do not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Because of this reason, it is done that this manner of the scholars in our land is private; and you do not forget it at any time; and I do not adapt what I learn, but rather through long duration of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, until I extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I direct my experience and study throughout the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has passed; for I have abbreviated it for you and others, and freed it from the occupation of length; and I will abbreviate it at the end of the abbreviation; and I will show it at the end of the declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of treatments that are administered to it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as it was done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection from the essence of bone fractures, from which a necessary introduction is, before we begin the reminiscence of fractured members and various ones of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning are forged by the artisans and a station about the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art, others of you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, it is advisable to begin treatment with phlebotomy or to release that, or whatever seems best at the time, if no circumstance prohibits it, such as lack of virtue, or if the person is prone to fainting, or is in a state of great decrepitude, or it is a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and crab; and prohibit gross meats and filling up on foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a safe apostemation, and if you do not fear an effusion of material to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which their custom consists.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is advisable that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of soft and gentle nourishment, in which there is viscosity, such as warm bread soaked in water, and rice, and cabbage, and peas, and calves' stomachs, and cows', and fresh fish, and similar foods, for with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture, pus cleansing, and mending.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And it is known that the brittle bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of the members of their body.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs at the end of childhood, just like the bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the dominant nature adjusts and joins above the broken bone of any separated part a similar cause to glue in which there is grossness that adheres and strengthens that joint which then becomes conglutinated and joined together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prohibit it from its own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you apply the dressings to the patient, dressings in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A diversity of fracture according to the diversity of the member (or limb).
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And it is known that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and likewise all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I come with a reminder of the entire species of fracture, explained in the seventh chapter distinctly from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is a diverse multitude of fractures in the body.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified in their body; for there is made an arch-shaped fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some views are made of a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astellia and proceeded and non-proceeded, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species has its own proper anguish or torment in restoration of the thing, according to what will come as a reminder of it distinctly in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is a signal of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thereby is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is a twisting of it, and of that a prominence and appearance to the feeling, and so of it when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is not an apparent twisting in the place nor does it seem so by touching, you should touch the bone with agitation and if the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is a twisted or small fissure, and it does not matter that you put your hand on it with compression of everything; also place above it one of the medicines of which you have memory at that moment when it suits the location; and apply it strictly with subtle pressure.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the location when it is curved and not divided into two or another thing that does not occur in the sagittal area, as the entire part of its comparison is reevaluated, then it is suitable to begin from your hour for rectification of what occurs to it with an apostema cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an apostema cautery occurs to it, then apply it for several days until the apostema ceases; and also wrap it according to whatever method you can of lightness and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And be aware that restoration of it and thinning of it is preferable to removal of the bone in which the sagittal wound occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the method that will bring back its memory.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More so if in the bone there are sagittal wounds, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be the one in which you hold the limb in its natural shape, while the extended parts of the limb are stretched, then you will perforate so that you make the additions return to their place and according to each manner that you can put them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not fall on the patient during their operation nor injure them; and perforate yourself according to your own power so that you apply one bone to the other as their best companions according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is advisable that at that time you touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is a different cause, correct it and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish doctors do who cause abscesses through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, just as we have seen through the operation of their foolish practices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equate and decent operation and strictness of that limb, and repose and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them understand that they should not move it during the hours of their vigil and sleep, and see to its revolution and agitation, and control its egestion, and control all its movements with all its virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is a position in which the pain is secured, which is the cause why when one feels pain in the disposition of the position of the limb or injury; then it is advisable that you change it to another disposition of that in which one does not feel pain; and be careful that the position of that limb is straight and equal, so that the limb does not incur tortuousness when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil member is that which you should recommend; for you should know that the constricted members are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the elbow, it seems good that the wrapping should be of a very fine soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, it is good that the wrapping should be tight and hard, because a tight bandage connects the large member and strengthens it on the whole part with constriction, in such a way that no bruise enters into it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, and begin your evacuation of excretion, apply a convenient poultice to that, on the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then come to that part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen it so that you do not loosen the constriction which you have applied to the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself to the wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other wounded area around the place with a bandage, and take the bandages to the affected part of the fracture; and be your operation in the tightening of the bandage and in softening of that one according to what we have said in the first bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place a sponge or cloth between the bandages of the stop, which should absorb the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness; and if not, do not put anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then put a poultice on the other bandage, and absorb with these decently made bandages as much as possible, if in the place there is no inflammation or cautious aposteme, then put it on the thing that causes the aposteme or that produces the inflammation; leave that for some days; and then you will strengthen with the things the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the bandages be of hemp or flax rope, and be formed wisely; or be of pine resin; or of palm tree fibers; and let the width of each bandage be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is fitting that the bandage which is placed on the fracture be a little thicker and more dense than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to what is suitable for the limb in size and smallness; and then strengthen with another bandage over the previous ones according to your first tightening; and then loosen above with a thread decently as we have said about tightening, and it should be your tightening according to the place of the fracture itself, and the more it is far from the fracture, the looser the tightening.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft material; and if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the operation of removing foolish lumps from the tort, it is a great error when the constriction is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And likewise, very thin threads are not suitable, because you cannot achieve with constriction what you want, and it is not necessary that between star and star there be less than a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the extremities of the stars, tighten the constriction in their respective places, then place under them a stop or pad made from wool or flannel so that it does not cause harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Certain fractures are like a wound, and cause disruption in the coding, and I find it memorable in that chapter according to uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every broken limb is not aligned with the stars on the first day; the reason being that the limb, when it is large, does not require to be placed on the stars but rather for two or seven or more days, according to your assurance of the advent of an apostema cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasterers by which the Ancients restored, which are placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of plaster as a restoration of fracture, convenient for many complications and especially for women and children, because it is something that doesn't produce heat or cold: and it is made from powder of flour, and it is the marrow of the flour that you should take from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And shape that dough as it is, but rather sift it with a sieve of wool, and pause the preparation of it not being coarse or subtle; then use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manipulation of plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is extracted from millet seed, all in equal proportion; of myrrh and aloes in equal proportion; alochil in double proportion; all ground and sifted and mixed with water or wool if the preparation of the patient is delicate; then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones easily, and suits many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manipulation of plaster which you prepare for fracture and sprain: recipe of migrach and half of white altimana, one part; of myrrh and aloe, two parts; of acacia, six parts; of Armenian balm, twenty parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Let all things be triturated in a mortar with a motivated contraction, and let them be sifted, and let them be bound with water or with white of egg and be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manual of plaster to joints and separated bones from their places, and accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: let the woolen cloth be taken and submerged in warm oil and cut vinegar and let it be placed on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster there is virtue of restoration, of caustic abscess and properly expelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manual of plaster that restores the fractured bone: take flour of fig tree and flour of wild poppy; mix all and make a plaster of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manual of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take roots of lavender, of chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, all in equal parts; let all be triturated and bound with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scalded, then bind it with water of colander humid or with water and use of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manual of plaster more strong in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess for the restoration of the member: take roots of lavender and seeds of linseed, and balustia, and honey, marjoram, flowers of violet, of chamomile, all in equal parts; let all be triturated and bound with water of sage or with sweet water or with wine, according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	According to the great Hippocrates, it is not advisable to place a poultice on the free member unless there has been a previous restoration of it, but rather make a cerate of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be moderate between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In Galen's opinion, it is seen that poultices should be placed on the broken member after its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat, such as myrrh, resin and gum, similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Handmade plaster to confuse lesion and pain: take equally, wax, human skin or partridge's brain, and salt, mixed together; let them be crushed and sifted, and then kneaded, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity according to which it is necessary that the ligature be broken and then disentangled, is that you consider if there isn't acute pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured, then you should not remove the motionless joints.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if a violent pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the location, then you should either constrain or remove it immediately, and put on the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and a maritime sea sponge humidified with Leon water, and submerge it in warm water, and with this wash the area where the discomfort and pain are calmed; then place the limb at rest for an hour; then apply a poultice made from wool soaked in vinegar or oil or rose oil, and lay it on the area for nine nights until you are certain of the apostume's cure, and the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and the pain of it is soothed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a thin and subtle plaster, and a small bandage that is not too tight for its primary construction, and subtly shape it to the area until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at times the apostume and redness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely soothed, and you need no longer a plaster or bandage, then apply thus as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no accident happens to the limb of any of the causes that we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some times leave all that on for twenty days according to what appears to you for the liberation of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust in the stricter manner of the primary stricture, and adjust in the swelling of the patient's food intake, according to which is preceded by the memory of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Mostly if you have previously cleansed and drained the area of the fracture so that it is not covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and thus moisten it with warm water that has been well-boiled, and let it be applied for three whole days; and loosen the stricture a little, and through this operation run to the member the nourishment, and it is lightly healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do with another poultice when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it covers, and it is restored according to crookedness, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were to increase the Ancients in their free writings would agree that this work is done badly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do anything similar, for which it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fractures when they occur on the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion or blow breaks all the bone within the siphac, which is called the false rib, thus as it is made in the chest, and for this reason this species is named comminuted; or the blow strikes a part of the bone, and strikes the flesh of it and does not pass the break beyond the rear of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is bruised or crushed; and the cause of it is percussion with stone or fall on stone, and accordingly its symptoms.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is near the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And from fracture that is bruised in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason it is named this species hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of stone and to its symptoms, which makes enter some layer of the bone into the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place thus as accidents to the parcels of the brain when accidents happen to their percussion and it is separation of their entry into the divided parts within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it happens in the bodies of humid bones, thus as in the heads of elephants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are called satagias, and they are weighed as separated vertebrae.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And it will come back to its place by the restoration of all that in its location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their pain and by feeling of corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The species of hair-like fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and is rough to the touch, and is anointed with oil, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the cure of fractures, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that they signify by manifest sign over fear, such as vomiting of choler, and stretching, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and evacuation of the humors and stiffness of those, and symptoms similar to them in the major dispositions, it is doubted if there is no health.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-threatening accidents, then you hope for health, and you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the wound comes to you in the beginning as it is wounded and this is in the days of winter, then you should study on the fourteenth day, following the entire disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should anoint the bone on the seventh day, having that which is above the bone be corrupted by the pancreatic membrane, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already perforated the pericardium covering the brain, and it is in a place of tender and fragile tissue, then it is necessary to suture the wounded and damaged part, according to what you have been advised.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient with the wound, and discover the bone according to custom and technique available to you according to the shape of the wound, and that it be easy for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need to uncover the bone, or if there is an abscess or a cautery wound, then you apply to it what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with warm poultices infused in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is discharged, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin with the circling of the bone and the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you cut the bone with an incision of strict measure, and this is the shape of it: Then administer another incision, a little wider than that one; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more incisions, wider than the previous one, accordingly.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is known that you have received the name of various incisions, some of which are longer than others; and some of these are shorter than others and are at the end of the extremities, and are made of iron or felt.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incision so that it does not touch the head and that thing.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is known that you should perforate in the circle of the tooth that you administer the incisions with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus but because those do not touch the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, so that the trowel has a round extremity or edge over that which is placed the head of the needle resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trowels, each of which is suitable for the thickness of each bone, while being present in the whole head of the skull, the extremity of which is sharp, and the length and shortness are according to the quantity of thickness of this head.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of probes: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the probe on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is penetrated; then return the probe to another location, and pause there where it is between all the holes the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment of it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the incisions in the incisors that are between each hole of the bone, and make a subtle pus above it with the tip of levity, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other reason due to various instruments which will be prepared for this purpose, like tongs and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And take care that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the siphac (likely referring to a nearby or related bone or structure, possibly the spine or hip).
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you have perforated the bone in a circuit, and it is separated from the hip if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted it, take care to scrape and smooth out that roughness of it which is on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but take care that it is sharper and more subtle than the other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If any of the small bones are broken and dislocated, then take that with ease which is due to you from the instruments; and then cure the wound with ointments and bind the ones that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from pain, which is called Gualia and is done with great ease; and this is its procedure: necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most evident, until when you have discovered that part and have placed your hand under the extremity of this gentle and quick instrument, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the smooth part is rounded and does not cut any cause, and the sharp part is of it in two edges before in length, thus like knives; that the smooth part should be adjusted to the head with the face of the sharp cutting edge on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the cutting edge of one part with a small hammer until it cuts all the bone with ease, as if it were revolving, and you should be secure from the pain that no accident happens to you in this manner, and if the medicine man was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a cause is attached to the bone of the pancreas in any location, it will affect that part of the body, and particularly the extremity of the affected area, as well as the area with facilitated movement, because it is freed from its discomfort and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and that which is cut off or obstructed by the bone is the surface of it, and remains in its roughness and subtle scratches, then it is necessary to remove that roughness and subtle scratches with subtle files, for which you have prepared the name, of various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer those in every location the most convenient for them and the most right for those according to what you have perceived in your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary that you administer in your file the one with which you sharpen the bone at the beginning the broadest of those files, and then use progressively the most subtle ones, and do not cease to do this continually until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	More, in each of the other small fractures, blood vessels and subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer care according to what you have lost in order to correct it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is a cause that is not lessened for all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it stops on what we have written and shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the dressing is applied when you have reduced the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth, and do so repeatedly as much as you can without gravely harming the siphiac; and then administer a warm poultice on it, and do not remove it except for the quantity that the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it on for the treatment for one day or two until you are sure of a cautious aposteme; and then remove it and administer medicines to which superfluous dryness is suitable, such as roots of linseed and flour of vetches, and powder of anise and aristology, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that is powdered over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer on it all medicine of property by which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware by your virtue that the plague in your treatment is clean; and it should not be on the surdity of gums or other; nor do you allow to aggregate virulence in it; for when it is adjusted on the pancreas of the brain, it corrupts that and poisons that, and adds to the patient that malicious evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the siphac of the head, since from it the bone is revealed and mainly when the treatment of it is neglected, and it is blackened on its surface; and thus consider then if it affects the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is perilous to be touched.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not affect blackening but from the medicine that is applied below, and it is by virtue of that medicine that it makes the blackening, then take from honey one part and from rose oil three parts, and mix those with a cloth, and apply that on the siphac; and apply treatment with the species of cure that are convenient for it to be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken in two parts together above the surface, or one of those having some visible signs, because there are two bones in it, since the part you have is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not affect it except for bruising and twisting and bending.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert the small instrument into the nasal passage, and bind that fracture tightly with the aforementioned bandage on the upper part, and with the same bandage below, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your own convenience, and beware that you do not fall into trouble because of your operation on the patient's ailment.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the instrument does not reach it, then you should be equal with the extremity of the rod on which the thickness is inserted.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should do the same as for this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And concern yourself with the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then apply the sixth or tenth day of rest from the apostemated cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a thread of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two clamps, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be on the clamp a thickness of such quantity that it fills the nasal tract.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers said that the clamps should be soaked in borax, and should be applied for the whole day, but it is not seen by me; however, it is known that the thread should be soaked in a plaster made with powdered mulberry; and apply it so that the bone is stabilized and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some remedies are inserted into the nose, in place of heat, a poultice made from lion's wrap, because it is enveloped in a cloth of flax; and it should be that you already have a fracture of the nose very vehemently and that the patient is not prohibited from inhalation.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, apply heat.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another remedy is applied, a caustic plaster on the nose with wax or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquil.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if the caustic plaster does not work, then it is necessary that you plaster the affected part with flour of fesus and powder of crushed eggs mixed with white album of egg; and place a poultice on the stopes, and do not lift the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then it is necessary that you split them apart, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for that; and place a dressing on the gash, and treat it with something that will knit and consolidate, and apply a plaster suitable for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an ulcer appears within the nose, then it is necessary that you treat it with heat and administer suppositories of lead until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter four.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not a serious wound, consider then if the fracture is only displaced and not broken in two and is curved to the separated parts within, then its union is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And do this, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger of the right hand; and press with it the curvature of the fracture within to facilitate the displaced parts coming together, with your other hand holding the displaced part of the bone; and decently direct that one.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts according to rectitude, so that their union is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if it happens with conjunction of teeth to disruption, then stretch those with which you expect will remain tied with wire of gold or silver or thread; and place a bandage over the fractured jaw, and place a doubled cloth over it, and decently made large starched cloth, or a sole leather strap along the length of the jaw; and tie this above according to what seems suitable to you for the binding and what is convenient for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Order the patient to use rest and tranquility, and stop the victim from eating sour or bitter foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the condition has changed in some way, then take note and separate that from the third day; and then rectify what has changed in it and apply a plaster made with powdered moly, or album of egg, or flour of cypress, after you have applied the cerate to it, and stop placing wool on the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when the plaster is annexed and adjusted on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; because many times seen, this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another occurrence of a hot abscess happens, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and the abscess is reduced.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or shards, then you should subtly choose those shards with what is convenient for the removal of those from the wound.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the edge of the wound is strict, then you should amplify it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then return to the place where you have stopped those hemorrhoids, and from those do not remove the blood, then you put on the orifice of the wound if it is large; and if not, place on that one of the plasters that suits that thing and incorporates it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the intestine when it is wounded.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the intestine is torn, it is broken from the part in front of the navel, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either torn, or separated, or separated into two parts which do not touch the hemorrhoids; and it is easier to restore; or it is so that it touches the hemorrhoids, and it is difficult to restore; or it is so that the fracture is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is with a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the intestine and sews the torn intestine, and the other stretches out the skin with that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then sew up the fracture with the threads until it takes the shape that it should have, and there is neither too much elevation nor concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you indicate more extension, then it is good to place a small cloth of wool or flax on the patient's spine, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the fork and constrict the cloth with your hand until it forms an angle as it suits.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the extremity of the fork to the separated parts beforehand, because it is bent towards the chest, then it is good that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be put on the muscle of one thigh in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle of it to the parts beforehand until the fork's end is elevated that is in the chest in itself, and then you correct the fracture and bend it with the ties or bands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	More often if you feel constrictions of the fork and they are swollen, then it is good that you make an incision over it and extract those constrictions with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision on it with one of the incision tools that you have prepared for this, since you had previously placed the fork on the instrument that serves the ciphac; and the instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is the shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to the intestine of which this is the cavity; and let its width be according to what you have need of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of it be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two extremities thus as veins, and one extremity be large and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you have extracted the abscess of the bone is large, and there is a risk of apostema or cautery, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear apostema or cautery, then you apply to the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the split of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an apostema or cautery occurs, then put on a dressing made with sour wine and rose oil, and apply it to that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is fractured and cut, it is that you put a plaster made from flour of wheat with white of egg, and apply it to the wound, and then apply the bandage around the thigh, if needed for that, and then take a splint, which is a stick that the Saracens use, that should be as long as possible, and its width be about one palm or so; and then put double powders on the wound and the plaster; and then take a thin plank of table, the width of which should be three fingers and similarly in length; and then wrap it in a cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the plank in the place above the fracture; and then apply a humectant as is suitable, and turn it around the neck and put the end of it under the patient's arm and under the patient's thigh, and apply it to the whole affected area, and as many times as the fracture needs binding, and this is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And that, the splint should not be removed from the fractured bone; and so that you see the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or the splint becomes loose, then you correct this and tighten the dressing.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then stop the patient's sleep on their neck, and place a small cushion under their arm in the night, so that when raised is the helper of theirs from the side of that one, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or their arm is tied to the neck of that one.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the dressing if there isn't an accident in the location or abscess, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen that it is attached to that, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the collarbone is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and several visits in several houses are made in months of time for that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade is broken in the lateral location and it's not that it's broken but rather its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the area of it is broken — and it is broken in the middle area of it — and not joined except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture or outward appearance of it prepare it and reduce that according to its natural shape in every way of art which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then put powder of ground alum on the wound, and stop with double-layered cloth; and then put subtle thread of tableted substance according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the thread is concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with cotton, and then tie the thread according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen them with long humidity from gentle constriction and firmness of the thread so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And check the dressing every day; and all visits that it should be softened, remove another visit and strengthen it and tie the thread if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let the patient lie on their own side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this procedure is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and make sure you understand that the beginning of this process is not urgent nor its dissolution concerning the bones.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the bone of the foot and you put a bandage on it, then you cut above it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the furcula, with caution of abscesses, if accidents happen here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the foot's fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle part of it and this pain extends to the ends; but the extremities of the movement are not broken that are shaken and communicated.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the internal parts and an accident happens to it with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and it is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be supported on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; and press the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two attendants, and proceed subtly in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner that is appropriate and convenient for it, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then pause over the plaster and stopper and pause about the subtle table of salt or of warm sand and of its similar things in levitation, since you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly apply it to the broken bone so that it is not hurt; and go with ligation according to retention on the back some strengthened veins, and strengthen that one with decent strictness; and then consider the ligation at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes a dissolution of that which causes corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs through that with the manner of cure of the patient; and then return the plaster, if it is necessary for the face; and adjust to the strictness inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It is known that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in coarse locations which are on the back; and of their extremities, from the part that is in front, nothing occurs to those contrary but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The knowledge of the patient is not hidden from the feeling of pain during the examination of the parts of the body.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it unites the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it is united as it should, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal divisions, then it causes the patient vehement pain and puncture, just like a puncture that occurs in one who has pleurisy, and because of this the bone puts forth the blood; and it causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Remedies are applied to that with many applied remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them it is said: it is good to give the patient foods that cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflated and expanded, and the fracture may be pushed away from the affected parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would have avoided that for what is not a slight cause to generate a post-operative abscess, if it didn't happen; and if it does happen, then it already helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They say that some of these should be applied to the navel and tightly bound; and it seems like a rational treatment, but it is feared that the binding will push the excesses to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They say that some of these: where the area is covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders are applied between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the binding wrapped when you envelop this according to the treated condition; and then treat the patient with care of fullness of life and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if a vehement contraction of the patient causes one that cannot be borne, and the bone pierces the veil with a pointed puncture, they fear for the patient, then where they make an incision on the area, uncovering the broken rib, and place upon it an instrument that holds the chest, the remembrance of which is preceding, and that they penetrate the bone with ease, and extract this.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess appears, then cut it and push powders into hot rose oil and apply to the area, and treat the patient with that which is suitable for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be raised on the bed on which it sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter nine.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some say that a fracture of the neck bones is due to an excess of phlegm, and similarly for the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: for if the members are already softened and numbed and deadened and cannot be moved or stretched or strengthened, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, you do not feel pain in them, then you should know that it is not curable, and in such cases it is often fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you touch them and feel tension in the fingers and puncture, then you should know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the disease can be cured with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see a similar thing in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the weight of the body.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that it is already softened, the same thing happens to them as in the others, and also when they lie on their back, there is vomiting and evacuation outside of their will, and some say that it is raised on its back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with the cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	More often if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and the disease is easier.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you perform a cauterization on the aposteme, placing it on the rough spine or with olive oil and rose water, or with mugwort and hazel; place it for several dressings per day until the aposteme is cauterized.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting and expelling plasters, and tighten it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone slips or any cause that has already been separated from it, then cut on the cartilage and show that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment to promote healing until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	More often if the skin of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the pain, then cut so that you insert your right thumb in the anus, and join the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible for a second setting; and then place on it a plaster and bandage, if needed, and then tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel shattered kidneys in him, then apply a dressing on that, and remove it, and treat the wound with the cure that is preceded by what will be healed.
Capitol .x.	And if the fracture is not united, or if
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the width.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hips are often fractured, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not but a communication in the extremities of those and are cut in length and decline to the disjointed parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is numb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over him until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you bind that according to what is suitable for equalization until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the hip or that already declines to the disjointed parts, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have bound that, put a plaster on it, and place a splint of wood or of fabric on it, and tighten with a bandage over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Engage the concavity with what fills it so that it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their side or over their side of the ribcage.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If there is an acute abscess, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the acute abscess is settled, and place upon it what settles according to what has been previously stated; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen thus as is suitable.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the joints or they are dislocated, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the helper or assistant ( possibly referring to a type of injury or surgical repair, but more likely
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a wooden splint according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And bind them with two ligaments, and then let them be suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient sit on a chair; and then put the broken arm outside on the splint until it reaches the joint of it in the middle place to which the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then lift the minister above that heavy cause, or extend the treatment to the parts of the body; and at the same time, let the doctor adjust the fracture with the hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manipulation is that the patient should be lifted above their own neck and the hand of the doctor's collar with a bandage; and then instruct two servants that one of them should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold the pus from the wound; and each of them should extend to their respective part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen above the fracture with a bandage and also above that with another bandage, and each of the two servants should extend to their own parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, it is good that half of the bandage should be placed on the skin and the other part above the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is good that the bandage should be placed on that location and also above the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap that with ease and without trouble, and then as soon as it is wrapped as is proper and applied with good application, then tighten it if there is not an accumulation of pus.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	More often if the aposteme abscess forms, then apply the strictness inside the infected area, and let it rest on a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rosewater until the abscess breaks, and then you will remove it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of removing it is that you apply a plaster on the fracture, and then put a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that aid, and place your hand opened over the shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And secure the cloth and tighten it around the aid of the arm so that the arm stays in place, unless some cause related to the broken bone prevents it.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use a splint.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And put on the fracture that splint which is the thickest and strongest of the other splints; and put between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from the entire affected part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten around the splints with the strictness that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your tightness on the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more aligned, then the tightness should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you examine the position of the stars and the strictness as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its natural position, then you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the strictness and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no acidity or inflammation occurs in the location; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to an excess of strictness; and thus correct all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	More, if you are confident that no cause of that will occur, then do not undo the ligature unless after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the assistant a full pillow of woolen material, and consider at all hours of night or day that the figure of the broken member not be deformed or dissolved, or that the ligature be softened, thus correct all this with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food in the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then take care to thicken the patient's food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the assistant and the patient's leg to be strapped for nine days; then it is necessary that they be unbound and a bath and medication with ointments be administered which rectify that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is a pulled apart one, then do not untie from that the ligament and the staples for ten days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of arm fractures.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one which is placed beside the small one, from the part above.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it happens that only the larger fork is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller fork is broken below, then the restoration of it is easier, and the healing of it is also easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fork of the arm is broken in the lower part, then the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fork below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension with ease so that it can be straightened.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	More often if the large intestine is what is constricted, then it's good that you apply a warm and violently acting poultice.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are constricted at the same time, then it's good that you apply a stronger and more forceful external treatment.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it's good that you place the figure of the hand for the restoration of it and the extension of the stretched-out part on a cushion, and let the palms of the hands be at the divisions above, more elevated than all the other fingers, and the hearing finger being lower than the others, and the patient be seated on a low, decorated chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of him in the height or depth of it, so that the patient does not lean forward with difficulty.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the assistant extends the arm of the affected part more towards the right hand or to the left, and another assistant extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor puts the bone in place so that he reduces it according to the best shape that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the bone is shattered in the fracture, then you will perforate to reduce all the weight in its own place with your own virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in the fracture that the bone is separated and does not hope for restoration, then you do to it and apply this according to the method that we have spoken of above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	More often if the fracture is with a wound, you have already made a special chapter for it, and therefore take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscessed cautery occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then anoint a cloth made with wax, olive oil and white wax, and be moderate between thickness and subtlety, and apply the cloth strictly with subtle pressure until the abscess is discharged; and then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powder of moly, clay and dove's dung, and put staples; and let the staple be that which is placed on that fracture, clean and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the name of the staples of the arm is seen in the major preparations, or it is a fracture in one splint or in two splints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And apply your pressure on the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when more is the extraction to the parts above the fracture or to the lowest parts of it, apply the pressure a little softer according as it is preceded by the reminder of it in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not harsh nor rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be moderately of its own proper size between fine and coarse, just as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Examine the limb and the ligament closely for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if a cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the bandage or dressing.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture is already softened and the bone is already reset and resembles its original shape, then correct all that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more that the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess of bandage, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and leave it for several days until the flow returns to the limb, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	More so, if to the patient no cause of those that we have mentioned happens, then it is not necessary that it be untied for about twenty days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its own power of agitated movement, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that depends on the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the knee and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	It is known that in the knee and joints of the fingers, fractures often occur, and they do not heal by themselves unless treated with manipulated movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or injury occurs in the knee, then it is good that the patient keep their leg straight and their toes aligned with equality, and place their hand on the extended limb.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those that are to be joined with a good joint.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is good to apply a plaster and a dressing, unless a hot cautery is applied; and place a bandage underneath according to the size of the location, and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Moreover, if the crack is in the inner parts of the palm of the hand, then make a figure of a sphere with cloth, and command the patient to grasp it with their cracked palm; let it be tightly wrapped with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the bandage of cloth be such that it allows for movement, so that the bandage is applied to the palm; and tighten it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer parts of the forearm, then it is necessary to place a splint on both sides of the fractured area and under the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then put a bandage, as if the hand were wrapped in a sling between the fingers with a ligament.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be wrapped according to what is necessary and properly secured on the palm with straps, if you wish, place a small splint to support it so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle one, or the index, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be wrapped and tied around the finger itself; or all the fingers can be tied together in a row, which is better; or a small splint can be placed on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then apply that, the disposition of a hot poultice and oppose it — in your operation — to what is necessary when any of those causes occur, as the narration of it has been repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter fourteen.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, when it is broken and fractured, is declared by the sensation according to which it is converted into the front part and the worst pain.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is placed prone on their stomach and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends the entire bandage to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	More, if it is approached to the root of the thigh, then let the bandage be brought near to the bottom at the part of the knee, so that the extension comes in itself, and the other bandage is below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near to the knee, then let the bandage be made near to the knee, and let the extension be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should oil the bone with both hands entering as far as possible to reduce it according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then put a plaster and bandage, if nothing abnormal happens to the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	More often if there is an abscess in the wound, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has been drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The dressing of the wound should be made in this way: take a bandage that wraps around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove its excess; then wrap the leg up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long fillet between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the separated parts, and let the ends of the fillet protrude from the upper part of the two parts, and then wrap around the leg and the thigh what is left over from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then put a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture itself, and put one of them as a splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the fractured area can be immobilized.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start dressing with a strong bandage on the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you tighten it more around the area of the fracture, your dressing should be less tight and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the separated parts of the foot until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the muscles of the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then put the structure on that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or cautery or swelling to the member, and if any of these things occur, then remove the dressing from them, and rectify what occurs, just as we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so if in the bone there is a piece of bone that can be put back, then take it and join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, sew over it and keep it in place, and cure with what is preceded by the remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And several times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by other things that are adjusted to its muscles, just as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it in such a way made, it does not cause lameness to the patient; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps from the defect.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tooth's root.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	And you know that a fracture of the root of the bad tooth is painful, especially when the rotten parts are touched or irritated.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it hurts at the fracture, then it is not just a crack or a hole in its parts, and this is with a wound or six wounds, and about that all has been said according to sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is so that what is broken from its parts should be united with the teeth, joined together as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply a plaster and put it on that rounded stick, if needed for that purpose; and bind them strongly with a bandage to hold it in place.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, similarly as it is applied to those cases in which it is opposed to all accidents, so that what is convenient for it may be healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter sixteen.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named for the leg itself; and the other is slender, and is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And the treatment for each of the types of fracture is the same as for the two bones of the arm, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken at the same time, the leg is turned into many fragments.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is turned into pieces in front (or: towards the front).
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, it brings great danger, and is one of those causes that cannot be neglected.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and alignment and ligature of the splints according to that treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But especially beware that if the fracture of the leg is an old and established one, that the extension should be less and more gentle, and relieve your hand.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you put on the splints and complete the entire treatment, then you will take pieces of cloth from the thigh, which are placed on the areas where the causes of pain are located, and are made similarly from branches of palm; choose from those the ones to which a small thickness is requested, and not be of the rough cloths, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, from the knee to the thigh.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one on the front part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be tight from the knee to the bottom of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two strips in three places on both extremities and the middle place, so that with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right part and the left part, and it remains in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a splint of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and it should be placed on it, on the leg, so that it conserves that movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, take care that you do this in a fracture, and when you apply a plaster properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and examine it for previous study, and you keep it from abscess and from inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then apply to it what is necessary so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 18.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not all ankle fractures occur completely; but rather some bones of the foot are subject to fracture; and for the toes of the foot few fractures occur, and they do not occur except as a result of awkward positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones need to be elevated above them, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared in this way beforehand.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then put the one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and press those, and squeeze, and bind them together so that they turn into their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and dressing to the underside, and place on the belly of the foot a small table with two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And tighten that bandage around the foot with a downward tension, since you have wrapped it in cloths and other dressings which indicate its needs.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then undo the ligature, for you will find the bones joined, or if they are fractured, or if they are dislocated, and the operation on them is thus completed.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of the toes are fractured, then restore them, and bind them in the same way as you did and were advised to do in the restoration of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then apply a splint to the fractured toe according to its length, and let it be slightly raised from it; and place on the foot this table that I recommended to you, and tighten it with a downward pressure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	When it is that which is broken from the bones, two or three or more, then you pause on each of these things a quantity wrapped in lion's cloth, and stretch the table at the lowest part of the foot, and be standing over one of the ends of the table for the belly of the foot to have good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply yourself to every accident that suits this case.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the knee of the thigh and the bone of the hip and the rod of the man. 
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh of the woman is broken, then make that plaster cast on the hip, and incline it towards the back of the two a little, and let it be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the midwife put a plug in the thigh of the Cot, and make it in the thigh of the patient like a spear; and let the woman be bound, and lift the back of the little one little by little, until all that is forgotten so that it is seen in front of the part of the thigh like the spear and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then put powders on the back of the patient, and when they want to urinate, remove the cot with ease and let them urinate, and return and bring back that second according to the method according to which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And make it so for seven days or around that, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a piece of owl and pull through the hole of the patient a thread of hemp; and insert all the bladder into the thigh of the patient, and blow into the thread with force until the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be filled with cot and stayed for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the hip bone of the man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and piercing of the water that we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And this water that is applied is not hidden in these nearby fractures and what little is gained, mainly to the one to whom some study and use and understanding of my free speech is; for that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via the right direction in restoration and in the strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	More in the rod of the man when it is fractured, take a poultice of water, and put the rod in it; and then put a pause on the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture with a wound occurs, and mainly if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you should cut and make an incision as much as the conditions of surgery require, or testify as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague flows with blood, then it is advisable that you take care to retain what is discharged from them, so that you powderize over the wounded area, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if a hot abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, lest you cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin exposed, then it is advisable that you force to reduce it and push it in with your hands made easy and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not at your disposal and the preparation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four of these instruments according to the quantity that is indicated in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be reason, and let it be in the small groove so that it is not doubled over the comprehension during the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be of sharp extremity to which there is margin on the six extremities; and let the thickness of it be tending upwards, and of its mass entering into the divided parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is little spade or small shovel.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of the pointed instrument be elevated above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert that into a cavity so that it returns to the bone, and let it be adjusted with some adjustment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then make an effort to adjust the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken one is subtle, and it does not take the instrument for good reception, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely to what we have recommended, then cut it to what is necessary for it, with one of the saws in whichever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then return that which remains in the bone of roughness and of worn-out cartilages.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is returned, and the return brings the patient violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do what you confer with the patient for great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the restoration you perform on the bone is complete, then submerge a black cloth dipped in warm vinegar, and specifically if it's summer, and do not apply cerate or other causes with oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stars ( possibly balms or medicines) at the time of the complement of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that scar tissue forms with forced exertions and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not touch the wound to the fracture, because many times this is done by foolish doctors, and causes death or a corrupting illness, or putrefaction to occur on their patients, which is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the aforementioned structure (or bone) relaxes, becomes soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those accidents we have mentioned earlier, and you find pain in that area, then it's not advisable to put a dressing on it, but rather make a covering of durable cloth in place of a dressing and tighten it with straps.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when you have already dressed the wound one or two times and you see that pus has formed in it, then remove the cloth that you had applied on it, and administer warm poultices, with which, according to our custom, we treat wounds, such as a tetrapharmacum ointment and similar things.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is suitable for you to loosen the bandage and inspect the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it to the outer parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes many days and is not consolidated nor has the pus been separated from it, then you should know that there are small abscesses here that need to be opened in order to probe the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those abscesses, those that are separate, remain and extract, those that do not separate from them and touch the member and cause pain, you should try to cut them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens to the wound with pus or ulceration, which is an indication of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those things that are convenient for its cure, as preceded by the narration in the previous chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of this, in which it is necessary that my sermon be and you present your weight: when the bone is fractured, apply a poultice on the member thus as the bone of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction of it, nor its extraction, for which four seen motives happen due to this death; having laid aside that which puts you in danger, because the pain will be strong for itself for twenty days or thirty; and then cure the wound if it is visible to you, and if not, lay aside that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of swelling that happens in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many seen causes happen to this swelling in the vicinity of healing of a fracture, and mainly that it is near the joints, and it is hidden by the shape of the member; and furthermore, it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer to it those medicines that have been stipulated as such, like aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; in this way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with six or eight ounces of wine, or with album of water, or with sharp vinegar, and apply it on the swelling in a poultice, and constrict them around it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Let the affected limb be bound with a tight bandage for several days; and place on it a poultice made from another plaster, until the swelling is reduced; or apply a sheet of lead to it, since lead has the property of reducing all inflammation in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a stone and the necessity to provoke a crisis is urgent, then cut it with the most superior part of the instrument, and cut out the excess and prominent parts, or shave them with a razor until they are reduced; and treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and the bone is rejoined, the member becomes subtle and fragile not according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the bone is rejoined, the member becomes subtle and fragile, it is not done so except for many causes: among which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the bad joining of it not according to what is necessary; or due to superfluous strictness of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or due to a multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to lack of blood in the body of the patient and due to weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The cure for this is to give the patient something to eat and to make their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer a bath; and apply warmth and joy to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws out the nutrient matter, or continues to extract it with warm water, until the nutrient returns and recovers its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibited is the operation of their re-breaking.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to a member that has already been restored, then apply the healing of its crookedness and swelling to the broken bone and knot, and it is for this reason that the shape of the member is spoiled, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, therefore it is not suitable that you receive the word of whoever claims that that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is very shameful, causing great fear, the signal of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the lameness and knot are recent, then it is suitable that they be wrapped in warm water in which have been cooked softening herbs, such as leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar things; and let a plaster be made with mollifying plaster, such as diacalloben made well; or let there be applied a poultice of root of altea and let it be bound with wool of gualina or with oil of cyrimum, and let it be plastered with that; or let there be crushed fat figs and let them be pressed with women's milk, and similar things to those of the medicines which are called consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved with assiduous friction of the humid places, and administration of movement of the limb to be applied at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if there is already a tortuosity that has been formed and is strong and converted into stone and necessity requires treatment with iron tools, then it should be the most discreet cauterization and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and what is in excess from the nodes of that member should be cut away with subtle incisions, and facility should be administered to that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its proper place, whereby it is deprived of movement, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings to the patient great pain and large sores.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and strong with what has been done, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not advisable to massage or stretch during the time of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More often when this happens, then it is necessary that you proceed to the pathology of the patient, and place on the outside what will help the abscess; and place the member in warm water and oil, and place it reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let every member be cured with the water from which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And already order the chapters of displacement according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the cure of displacement of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the two jaws are dislocated and do not articulate; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with minimal movement, and slightly loosened; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and compression, until they are loosened at the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and so that he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often when the dislocation of it is minimal, then in major conditions it returns by itself for a minimal cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered promptly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand in the jaw at the point of dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or inserts both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of their hands are outside with the ones that hold them; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and release those muscles on each side; and the doctor holds the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easier and does not delay the reduction of both altogether, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they return and are held in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then apply on those areas of pain a poultice of wax and cerate, made from wax and oil mixed together; and bind it with facilitative bandages that allow for easy movement.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be held between two pillows, so that they do not lean to the right side nor to the left; and do not force them to chew any substance; having forbidden food that is harmful to them, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are settled, then let them eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth unless there is eating and drinking and occupation, until the jaw is massaged and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not converted to their proper places, then show gentle movements and daily fevers and continuous soda, and let the stomach of the patient be evacuated, and let it also be vomited with pure colera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you administer this, then know that it is beneficial; and gentle movements show that death will occur to the one to whom this happens in x days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder is not dislocated from the part that is joined to the chest; and some times it is dislocated at the junction in front, and this is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on their back and extend the two arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then bind the place with your palm with strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster on that and sprinkle powders and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More on the extremity of the one who has had the thigh continuously bandaged, it is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and adjusted as we have said and as it appears to your preparation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then stop on that plaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest so that it may be healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its own place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in one way, but rather in three manners, of which one is dislocation at the part of the tendon to the part of the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it be dislocated at the part of the muscle itself, and this is done harshly; and it is not dislocated at the back parts due to the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts due to the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and forced outward at the parts of the bone away from the tendon, and mostly in those where the muscles are few, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is forcibly pushed outward with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And strongly strike the affected areas with a mallet or hammer, and the muscle of the patient is cauterized with a branding iron, and it is done for that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, take care that you press what is above the patient's vertebrae, and then proceed with the treatment of the patient.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is in the parts of the body that you feel the vertebrae; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find among them a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the dislocated muscle the vertebrae of the body and the feeling of the head of the muscle is like a hollow tube, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they do so with any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or ankles, and then you find a visible and palpable tumor, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation a lighter reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the parts above; and then places the tied cloths behind the vertebrae of the patient, and raises the joint with strength to its own place, and the minister raises the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then holds it in place until it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Unless what we have said does not work, and it is because of the beginning that causes dislocation, for several days, then it should be that the patient is bathed in warm water and given a drink that loosens and softens, such as cooked roots of altea, and fenugrec, and melillot in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed in a supine position on their back and a cushion under them in expectation of urine that is held between relaxation and tension, and then the doctor places their hand on the patient's lower back, and elevates the head of the muscle with a virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so it is not separated from the other parts, and another servant holds the patient's head, so it is not separated from the other parts, because that soon returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, return to that method: it is that you make a man present who is longer than the patient, and stands on the side of the bed, and places their muscle under the patient's little leg and lifts the little leg up to the other parts behind so that the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from the other parts of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	More often if the patient is lightweight, then it is good to have another cause suspended, so that gravity affects it, for the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: and it is that a wooden stake be fixed on the ground, the top of which has a rounded figure, similar to a mortar pestle, that is neither thick nor thin, and place the patient's feet on it; then place the patient standing on the top of the stake with drapes, and the patient should stand according to the length of the stake, and extend the hand of one side to the divided part of the other side; and the body of the patient from the other side should be extended with force, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stake the quantity of which is in length two arm-spans, and the width of it is four fingers, and the thickness of it be smoothed at the tip of the pincers according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place on the rounded top linen cloths, so that the stake does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the thigh of the patient should be placed, and the hand or arm extended over the stake between the divided parts, and the stake should be tied to the hip and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a ladder-shaped support according to the width, and the hand should be extended to the parts of the shoulder, and the other thing should be suspended from the other part, so that the joint is held in position.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, and then you take the wool thread of flax of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of mulberry and white of egg on all the muscle, as it is dissolved underneath, and then strengthen the thread with strict bandage; and the ligament is turned over the plaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and let it be, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And that the food of the patient should be mild, until the member is comforted, for it is easier for the healing of it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more abundantly after seven days and an exercise of movement; and so if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then it should be administered a cautery with three touches, as it is previously said in the chapter of cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if the injury is such that it has been done and after seven days the ligament and the joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and the bandage are placed over certain areas, but it is not fixed and the arm cannot be lifted to the separated parts, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been inserted or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done to the heel and the shoulder or the back parts, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other bandage, and cure it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that the healing is slow in the member and tardy in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths several times until the slowness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty; and this is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the part in front of the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you, for whether the hip falls forward or backward, or touches according to whatever figure it may be dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with the shoe, this is declared manifestly to you, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the upper muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you have the thigh in place, reduce the dislocation as much as possible before it comes to a severe boil, because if it comes to a severe boil, the reduction of it is difficult, and not easy to heal; and especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times death results from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is that which can be reduced, is that the hand of the patient should be extended with two others, and the arm of the patient should be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor should be on the hip and the patient's, and the doctor's elbow should be pressed against the joints with the tips of the fingers, or at the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	More often if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that the hand is doubled back on its own hand, until it strikes the hip with the root of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants stretch out the arm, and hold that same limb with two assistants so that it is not moved back during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then wrap the arm from the elbow down, since it is enveloped with doubled cloth wrapped long over the hand of the patient.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil so that it may be those causes that help with lubricity of the joint for ease; and then strongly massage the joint with vehement rubbing until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the patient who is placed on that plaster in which there is stipicity and evacuation with white of egg, and it is strengthened with strict descent, the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is loosened; and so if the joint is formed in its own place, then you loosen the bandage of the patient and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you apply the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it for some days until it is fully strengthened; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to the patient a worsening, then the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or apply an aleiatic poultice on the joint, so that it is a moving fat pad; and then it is bound, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply this paste, and put that in a bath; and when you sweat, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and apply it repeatedly to that alleviated area, so is the movement of motion, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the midst of a bath, until it becomes smooth.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place on that wound of the cow's humid and scratched area with paste and stretch over it; and do this several times, because it is humid and returns to its natural condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is concerning the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, and the opposite is for the other joints, but it's necessary that there be speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the minister or servant extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint, and presses it in until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	It is most important to consider if the palm has already been applied to the belly of the hand, when the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that internal injury be on the table, so that the doctor's hand grasps around that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if it returns soon enough, that's good; and if not, then reinforce that with a plaster cast supporting the abscess and relieving it; and do not touch this, because if not, neither suffering nor power will be on the reduction of the pus that passes into the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	More importantly, the joint is bent according to its curvature; and do not tell the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is loosened and cannot hold any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not an art in it but rather a cauterization near the evacuation of it and strengthening the confidence of giving some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore when the dislocation is returned, then put on it the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be relieved and strengthened for several days; and then let it be unbound and relieved, and the hand of it be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the urine is hindered and there is acidity in the bladder, then apply warm water and friction to certain affected areas, until relief is obtained.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of displacement of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Certain injuries can dislocate the fingers entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated from the palm or the back of the hand, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation with the thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend it above the area where it is dislocated, and let it rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it becomes straightened in that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to this method, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with this, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and bind it to that area and perform the first operation in the same way, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same with this when it is dislocated in the other areas.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When there is a complicated dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and movement of the vertebrae from their proper place, then in that case there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is outside of their control, and they cannot retain it; and some members of theirs are weakened, such as the thighs or legs or arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, because many times it is dislocated and many times the displacement of these to four parts occurs.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that one is already dislocated to the back parts and is called a prolapse or falling through, but more likely it refers to  "gibbosity" or hunchback.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is that first consider if the hunchback occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure nor complete healing for it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which happens by fall or by shock or similar to these, the Ancients have already spoken about the methods of treatment at length, from which the most returns to profit; but I, having already written extensively on this, will abbreviate, for fear of being too lengthy, due to my closeness to the subject matter and my intention to explain it, to which I have dedicated myself, and using various instruments, with which I will show and demonstrate.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in the swelling that occurs on the sole of the foot, there is neither ingenuity nor cure for it; and similarly in the one that is made between the two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except the one that occurs on the back itself with what I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face on a high bench near a wall, and a cushion should be placed under them to prevent their foot from being moved.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bench near their head, and another stick in the air to hold their feet at the other end of the bench.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a pit; and another minister should hold the other one according to the same method.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and under the armpits a firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick which is near their head, and tie it on them; and then tighten the other bandage over their hips and near their knees, and near their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then extend the minister's hand to the ligament at the part of the thigh, and do not let the two thighs and the ligaments of the above-mentioned places be restrained, but rather hold them firmly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine for strength until it returns, or he places on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the aforementioned feet until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three arm lengths, and carve on the part of which we have said that is proper for the patient a place in which the extremity of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places the feet on the other extremity, and tighten well until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, take the turn which is wrapped around the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground at the end of the bed two feet, the length of which is one arm, and at the end of the bed also two feet; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already make in each foot a hole through which the turn passes, and each one is firmly held to the ground so that it is not moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a wooden stick in which the turn is made, and let it be wrapped around the two trunks of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it is a trunk in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is wrapped; and in the two other sticks is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments that you have tied on the chest of the patient in the stick which is above their head, and the ligaments that you have tied on their thighs in the turn which is above their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then for each turn there should be a minister who will turn it with their hand, and the doctor will anoint the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the spine is returned, and the area is anointed, then take a plaster made with egg whites and vinegar, and apply it; and put it on the plaster as a piece of tape, the width of which should be three fingers or about that, and the length of it should be the quantity that covers the place of the pain, and on the part of the spine above.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with a ligament as we have said, and give the patient subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any weakness in the area at the end of the treatment, then it is advisable that medicines which soften and prepare for the administration of the tablet for a long time be administered; this has been recommended, and already administered in that place is a layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some weakened parts are found in the lower back of the spine, and it is suspected due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been weakened so that it is not advisable to make an incision on it with this medicine, because it will bring about a fatal outcome.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It is known that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only cause dislocation, but also do not bring about what is brought to other joints by small movement and concussion.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation of the tooth is evident when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to the diseased side, it is then longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, because the diseased side cannot bend its knee towards the tongue area, and this is the place where the tongue is pressed by the aposteme of cautery, so that the head of the hip has already been penetrated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs in the parts beforehand is that their accidents are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs in the front parts is that they extend their own leg according to their will, but nevertheless do not bend that knee which has pain in it, and if it is perforated or strained and cannot support on that knee beforehand; and their urine is retained and their tongue is pressed, and they drag their ambulation on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs in the back parts is that they do not extend the knee, nor can they bend the front part which bends the tongue area, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the tongue area is softened, and the head of the hip is below that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The greatest reduction of the species of this dislocation is what you consider, namely, if the dislocation is old and ancient, and has already been treated with a remedy, then administer reduction therapy according to its condition, but it's not entirely in this treatment; therefore, it's not suitable for a hasty procedure to be done in that case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Moreover, in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it's one of the four species of dislocation, then you should reduce it to what will return the joint to its proper position and extend this to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it strongly returns and does not indicate another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the affected part from behind, or with their hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the leg above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of the one who is above in such a way that they put their hands under the patient's shoulders; and apply a strong bandage over the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to hold the extremity of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let there be extension of it or of the inner part to the angle of the buttocks, or from the back part to the region of the back or buttocks.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let the extension of all those things be in a single operation where the patient is elevated with their back to the ground and remaining hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is commonly applied to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply all types of remedies that I will speak of regarding its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the innermost parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their side; and place a poultice over the joint at the location where between the head of the joint and the spot that has been dislocated, the limb is longest; and extend the poultice upwards from the part of the ankle to the furthest part of the buttocks.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong minister should take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the joint, and strongly extend it to the innermost parts by vigorous extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is of the lightest cure with which this member is reduced, lighter than the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused for you and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure at all, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together with a strong, light poultice, on both the soles and both the ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each of them be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the patient be suspended over the head of the bed frame, and that it be on a mattress; and let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the thigh, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth pulling the thigh with force, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	More in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the displaced part, it is necessary that the patient urinate on a bedpan as we have recommended in the case of having hematuria; and let the ligament be strengthened over the affected leg properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then let two wooden frames be placed, one at their feet, and the other at their head; and let adjusted frames be placed in the middle of the bed, on which humid cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the frame being between their thighs, because the extension to the affected parts should not be hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to his own part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if the intestine returns to its normal position, it will be greatly beneficial; and if not, pause over that diligently and do as we have said in reduction for that insertion.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	More importantly, the patient must lie on his back with the thighs elevated.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this methodical narration on podagra; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's langenor, and then with the other hand he presses that one, and with that pressure he extends the displaced part to the front part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended to the back parts, and he is elevated from the ground; rather it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for the anchorage if his hip is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about placing him on two anchors; and it is on his face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no defect.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And then a compression bandage should be administered on the table over the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and that is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those groins and the patient stretches their own leg and expands those six excursions, then you know that the member as it should be is returned — and then you adjust the two hips and apply a plaster cast and stretch with a bandage in such a way that the width is not constricted in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and the plaster cast, and compare one hip to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those groins in improvement, then you know that the dislocation is already corrected, and therefore let the patient walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch it according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, and make it wait in walking on crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter twelve.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated to the front parts, and to the inner parts, and to the higher parts behind, but not to the lower parts in front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that it compels the patient to place their leg on their thigh; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its kinds is to make the patient stand upright, so that they extend their leg if possible; place their two hands on their face, and hold their foot between their two feet; then carefully place their shoulder in your palms, and press those against their shoulder strongly, holding them in place over their shoulder, and another servant extends their foot inward until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that the leg sticks to the thigh with lightness and without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that and make the leg stick to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then undo it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer a strong extension with ligaments in the treatment of the hip that was mentioned previously.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes sprained by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of it is made either at the inner parts or at the outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle swells up, proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of the sprain of it is gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and be immobilized until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the injury, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and have a strong and able minister at the rear part of the back of the patient in the middle place of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then put your right hand on the foot at the most superior part of the thigh, and with your left hand at the lower part of the thigh in the place of the knee.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and place your left hand for two supports, and extend your left arm; and press the foot of the leg with your right hand above the thigh to make it work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make there two supports as we have explained.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh for the third support, and you are at the calf.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus if it returns to one support or to two according to this method, and if the foot is healed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, for that which returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you is forbidden the reduction of the limb with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly on the ground, and which goes between their thighs, and you have wrapped around them a sheet so that it doesn't touch the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then one minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with their hands or with a ligature that lies on the heel of the foot; and each minister stretches against the extension of the other's part, and the cloth is stretched between the patient's thighs, holding it so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts below their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor will treat the dislocation with the healthy thighs, and another minister will hold the sound hip to the patient's parts, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction of it is declared to you, then pause to apply a plaster and extract that with a strong bandage, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware that you protect yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage on that area is not violent and tied tightly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage becomes loosened, retighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then undo it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forgotten to go within that space, it is not done safely that the dislocation is not on it dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if there happens to him a hot abscess, then beware that you administer in the release of it that which we previously mentioned, in another place of treatment and of application, until it is reduced.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter Four
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that one who is dislocated should be treated with gentle extension of the affected limb; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	More often if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient put their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them stand still as if they were not moving.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then put your foot down, and place the patient's foot on what is lower than the joints, and then press that with your foot upwards so that it returns, and you will see that it is already treated and does not appear in the same prominent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place on the belly of their foot a table that takes the whole foot, which has two clamps, and then tighten it with a decent structure and firm for three days; and then release it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter Thirty-Five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the species of dislocation that are caused by a wound or a fracture or several things at once.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When certain causes of these conditions occur, and you penetrate in the treatment of it and in the restoration of it, many witnessed events precede death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, it is not suitable that anyone presumes to treat it, except one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the administration of medicines that cut abscesses solely, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but rather to the one to whom you hope for health from danger, and alleviation of the sickness, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore force yourself to remove from it as much as possible the reduction in the treatment of the cause, provided that an abscess is about to be cut.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which will cut the abscess and cure the wound with what is convenient for it from the ointments of the dishonest.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the bones that are separated by joints, then you penetrate the statement of them, and do in this what we have said about simple illnesses of this type which precede in the places of these.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and beware according to your virtue that which is in the pathways of fear, as my preaching has preceded you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body, truly those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus finishes the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God may be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
