O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine by filling it with its contents, and have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations. And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is scarce in our region and is lacking in every detail, the science has perished and been cut away, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have executed. And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been forsaken.
It seems to me that I ought to revive its order in this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and shall bring together the forms of the fire applicators, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it behooves him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he know the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and their movement and veins moving and at rest, and from what place they issue.
And Hippocrates said that words without work are little, and with work are much; and especially in the art of manual practice.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously said, should beware lest he act improperly and harm people.
so that I have wanted many times those who engage in this science and surrender to it and their experience.
For I have seen a foolhardy surgeon who incised an abscess of scrofula or the throat of a woman, and incised the arteries of the neck; for so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I have seen another surgeon treat a stone in an old man, and the stone was large. so he removed part of the bladder with it, and died the honors within three days.
And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well knew that if he were cut he would die.
And I have seen another surgeon who treated the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the burn he made wounds.
and the surgeons full of ignorance restrain the break at the wound with strong ligatures, and do not leave any exudate in the wound, and leave it thus completed.
and he commands that he does not release it completely;
and he delays until the leg is entirely swollen and the foot rots away.
I was called to come to him, and hastened to release the leg; and when I heard it dislocated, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But the corruption of the limb was already confirmed and could not be cured.
and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the member was completely lost.
And let another mirer collapse the anchored abscess, and then inflame it through the wickedness of its nature.
For a chancre, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not matter to touch it with iron if it is in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupt.
And for this, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, the work where there is danger in many positions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For this, it is necessary that you take care of it, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take your instruments in proper order, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to their salvation and be praised;
and let the terrible diseases threaten health;
and remove your weapons from whom they cause doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: Do not take ill disease into your care, lest you be called mad.
I have discussed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and water medicament cauteries, and are ordered from the head down to the feet;
and about the forms of instruments, and the materials for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cups and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and it is about the chapters ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, as we recall the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and their harmfulness, are matters of great length and subtle science and the secrets replied to.
and many of the wise spoke about this and agreed with it.
and let them speak only a little, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all complexions where there is matter, whether of two complexions: that is to say complexion that is warm with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In a warm and dry complexion with matter, some debated and said that the fire cautery is great help; and the others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not suitable for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be applied to diseases that are already hot by heat or dryness.
and he says who says the opposite that the fire cautery makes great help for disease hot and dry that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it true once by experiment.
And in all cases, do not intervene unless it is the one who has proven its efficacy and knows through long experience the chapter on cauteries, the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, as well as their outcomes and the space of time;
of other complexions we have no fear, especially in diseases cold and moist. And all the signs gathered and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery altogether with heat is of the secrets of treatments, and has greater goodness than a burning medicinal cautery.
For the fire is simple, and only affects the part that is cauterized, and does not harm other parts little by little.
Hot medicines spread from one part to another and cause diseases of grievous harm in the affected part. and sometimes cure the patient.
The fire for its height and for the quality of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study I have devoted to the art, and it pertains to the virtue of things;
And for this reason I excuse the length of the words, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret, which is placed or fired, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the bodies, as the philosopher states in demonstrating; receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, when the fire cauteries should be performed, and they chose the times.
And I say that the fire cautery is suitable at all times, for the harm occurring is often mitigated by the aid of the cautery. and especially if the cautery is for pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm does not occur to the limb.
And never think of it, dear friend, as those foolish people do; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return. and they say thus;
and they say thus; but it is not as they think, for cautery is merely a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for the speed of its power, and for the virtue of its action and authority.
And possible it is that the disease comes once according to the temperament of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue;
and they are assembled in him the superfluities through the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not, apply cauterizers to him where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizers for pain, and similar things, and the same pain will not return at all; but this happens seldom.
And few people understand for what reason cauterizers are called the last of medicine, and that is to be seen.
but they do not believe that cauterizers are useful after medicine, and their intentions are false. For when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we apply the cauterizer, and it is effective.
Therefore, it is well known that cauterization is the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
The ancients said that cautery instruments of gold are hotter than iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and its high density;
and said that the cauterization does not cause corruption, but this is not true because I have proven it and found that it is indeed visible in some people;
and gold cautery instruments are hotter than iron, as they said. And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it will cool quickly.
and if you heat it too much; if they do it with fire; and then there is enough hindrance.
Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins shall be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold in the head, and there are two of them where we treat by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams and toothache and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicinal means altering the substance three or four times, according to what the virtue and strength and custom of the patient can endure. and then reapply the cautery to the patient.
And then place it across your hands, and put his hands on top of the palms.
after, place the base of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes. and when these two methods arrive, bleed from the armpit then heat the cautery called "olivare", of which its form is: And place it on the armpit mark with ink, and do so by lowering and withdrawing your hand little by little while turning it. then withdraw your hand alone, and look at the armpit to see if you see the bone slightly. and if you do not see it, repeat the application of the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
after take some thread, and place in wet soft cotton, and put on the armpit, and let it be for three days.
place a moist cloth on it in butter; and leave it there until the cauterization is removed; after treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacion" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges. and for this reason, it heals.
And none of them said that the cautery must be applied such that part of the bone is burned, and then the burned part of the bone should be removed and cleaned.
And another says that the cauterization should remain on until it is strong enough to burn down to the bone as wide as the ring that women put in their noses for the discharge of fluids.
and one must leave the wound widely open; after which one must treat and dress.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to be good in every respect, except for those who have the ability to fear;
and indeed it seems to me that I should leave it.
for the shoulder has become weakened by continuous exposure to its natural state, as we testify in other limbs.
and indeed, when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first application of the cautery seems more harmful and painful to me, and from that I work together with this method for healing.
When in the entire body there comes chronic pain that lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie" and of cleansing of the body and eyes and plasters; and if we apply the fire cautery as we have said before, and it is not useful. Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it not be too cold; then the cautery should be applied after that cautery a little as we have said above. After apply the cautery on each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said before, and apply the cautery or reset which is called "vasselz". and it is the place where we put suction cups; and lift your hand so that it does not reach the bone: the patient feels much more severe pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and the cautery for the horns should be finer than that used for the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
for the fire cautery of the head When there is sudden pain in a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the skull is purged by medicinal means, and other treatments for the conditions I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been performed, and all this does not help: then they make cauteries according to two methods, that is to say of aqueous medicine and by fire.
The cautery of aqueous medicine is that you take a dose of aloes, and remove the bark and the outer layer just a little on two sides of the shoulder where the pain resides in such a manner that you can apply the dose of aloes beneath the skin.
and when it is applied, hold it in place well and leave it there for twelve hours. and then remove the dressing and apply a dose of garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days. then place on a cloth soaked in butter until the dressing comes off.
After the ointment treatment until he is healed;
and if you see such ones of the other burning medicines that I have written or in the seventh treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery with coal to form it:
And it is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a clo (a knot or lump), and in the middle there is a small appearance.
and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly turn the fire a bit gently, so that the half of the thickness of the heart is burned.
and lift your hand so that the artery is not burned, which is above, and let an abundance of blood flow.
After apply cotton for the sake of the wound, put on the head for three days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and then dress the head with ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", do it at its tip, and beware of burning the artery in this headache which is not old.
of inflammation
When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization previously mentioned from medicine and iron is not sufficient, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot.
and thus prick along the length a line of half a digit long, and pull out your hand once, so as not to cut the artery and not come too close to the bone;
and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and let the nerves look only to the movement and that no spasm arise in the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding has great fear and especially for those who do not know it, and are not trained. and leave the work in progress;
but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
And if you see, administer the cautery as we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better and more effective than the other.
of the pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division do not help, then heat this cautery called "poins," as its form is described here:
After pricking all around the sick ear, or around both sides where the pain is felt, and then move a bit upwards from the root of the ear, since you have marked the place well. and have 6 points between each ear;
after the treatment, let it heal until it is healed.
Of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated with a fire cautery is not from those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the sections on diseases.
and do not apply a fire cautery to those similar cases that come from drying and spume of mucus.
When you treat this similar case of torture that moves due to phlegm in the body and from purgations of bile and gargling, and if it does not respond, then you must cauterize the patient with three fire cauteries. one at the root of the ear, and the other a little above the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the healthy part that is open, and apply it to the top of the ear a little below the tip of the ear, and another one at the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery there until the sides of the heart are burned.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And this is the resemblance of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle, and it should be that the blades are a bit thicker.
after the treatment of the wound as I have previously said, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauterizations: I on the two horns of the head, and one on the head, and one on the part called "wattles," as we have previously said, and the last cauterization on the entrance to the stomach;
and treat it as we have said before.
of lithargyrium
For this disease, give the patient large and purgative pills for cleansing the brain.
after resetting the patient's head, and place on the occiput the mustard plaster as written or treated in the treatise on plasters;
and this is the way of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is done thus, well done; and if it is not done thus, perform three cauteries descending from the head to the neck, with an inch of space between each cautery.
and treat the wound as with the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, then perform one cautery in the middle. and if the task is, two others over the two horns, and cure until it is healed;
and let the cautery which is called "olivare," as I have said before, be prepared.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of grease and what we have said before.
after clean the head of the patient, then place the cautery over the head and on each horn, and the fourth and third over the spine of the neck.
and if you have more need of it, and the body is moist and the patient is in pain, and the illness is severe, then place four cauteries over the spine of the back. and let them remain until the flesh is well heated, and withdraw your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" as we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain of dandruff and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patients are great and suffer from cold medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear the pain, make a gargling solution and chewing exercise, often modifying the cervix with good meats;
after placing the king in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have said before, and on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, apply the cautery as I have said for those with paralysis and flesh decay, on the spinal bone and neck, and use the olive cautery in the manner I have described.
If the patient is an infant, apply the fire cautery with subtlety according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or corrupted moisture are thick and large, then apply the fire cautery of such cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities decline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then he should drink something by which his brain may be cleansed, according to what was said before in the division.
After resetting the head of the patient; after tie the linen well, in a circle, and put it around the head;
and the patient be crossed, and be well held from all sides;
after apply the liniment, and wrap it in old goat's butter; and heat it over fire properly, so that the cloth can be applied as much as possible without burning; after empty the circle from within around the head, and let it cool;
and do this to the patient once each week with another good remedy until he is healed.
If you see cauterization done by making several pricks all over the cautery.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain greatly;
and then place wet cotton soaked in butter and gelatin fat on it.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and cause the patient to drink purifying things for the head, and keep them away from all moisture, and make them sweat or have baths several times on an empty stomach.
After this, instruct him to turn his head, and cauterize behind the ear, and make two cauterizations on the two temples where the descensions of the awe are together, or in one where the descension is alone.
and cover the entire cauterization with all the veins and arteries that are beneath the ear, and let the cauterizations be long according to the width of the temple.
and beware of blood loss, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it with your fingers as you are able.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the incision how to handle it.
and once done, make the fire cautery or cauterize behind the two rear bones.
and if it is seen that they are cold phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes. I cauterize behind the head, and two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations or brandish behind the two bones. and if there is need for more, cauterize the bleeding from the sorcery with a small cautery.
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit the patient at all, then let the patient drink three noisette nuts. after you have treated the head, and if necessary, cauterize or use an olive oil cautery. and cauterize two places called "clavilis" above the shoulders, a little below the hairline.
and be careful not to injure the artery.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare". of which here is the form:
And if you see, cauterize two places above the shoulders as long as the warts are.
and do not leave the hand there unless the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which points to the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes turns white and irritates the eye, and in such cases one should perform cauteries according to two methods. it is known as either with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in good health; after marking on the paper of the eyes a figure that be as well as the leaf of the laurel, and be the beginning of the mark among the hairs;
then place wet cotton soaked in egg white and saffron on the eye, then heat the cautery as is its form:
After cauterizing on the figure you have marked very little and many times, until the veins are burned in place;
and the signs of health of the eye are that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the shape of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it so for 3 days, then place wet cotton in butter until the scalding is removed; after the ointment treatment until he is healed.
and if hairs appear after this, and the paper is moistened again, then resume the cautery on that same place as you did first;
and if the hairs are burned off, then continue the cautery until the paper is lifted to its natural position and remains even, and do not prick the hairs with the eye.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make parchment in the shape of the olive leaf;
then take of French soap and strong heat, of each one liard, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then apply to the form as you are made like the leaf of the laurel, and place on the paper the eyes; and if the illness is only in the eye, one must open it, and if it is also in both. and put moist cotton from an egg under the eye.
and the head of the patient be in a proper position and place your hand showing over the medicine, and press it slightly and the egg each time the patient feels the medicine biting, for they feel the bite also like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your duty. and when the bite is passed, lift the head up and look if you see the paper lifted also as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision. and if it is thus, it is well.
and if not, apply the medicine to the shoulder again until the medicine takes effect, and ensure that your actions are even, and your eyes fixed.
then place a wet cloth with butter on it until the pain subsides, after which wash the shoulder with an ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to guard your work well with great care so that the medicine does not stick to the eyes.
and if the paper becomes moist and the hairs prick in the eye, resume the application of medicine to that shoulder which has become softened by the moist paper, as you did before. after washing until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the leaf of the myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men vary in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints;
and do not always follow the right way for him who studies this art.
of the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your side; and hold the minister's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor change its position;
afterwards, place moist cotton from an egg or juice of pomegranate on the eye;
after heating the cautery which is divided:
and it should be held at the head in the form of an owl's feather, so that the cautery is centered;
if you see, let it be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, let it be also like a tent;
but in any case, he who is held should move for your work.
after press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, work on it, and draw out the bowel;
after placing the hot cautery on the mark, hold your hand at the part above the neck next to the eye, so that your hand does not do foolish things; and place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, reapply the cautery once more, and do this again if necessary, and let it be for three days;
afterwards put wet cotton with butter on it, and the application of the drying ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a watery corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed; and follow the king's instructions according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Hear about the fistula, and set it right; after insert the thin wax tube where the form is indicated: and they place the quantity of one .3. of honey; and hold your hand with the wax tube firmly, and let not the patient move at all, that the melted honey does not flow into his eye;
and it must be that you place over the eye a wet cloth of wool or of cloth.
the honey thus heats the fistula, and the healthy part through wonderful healthiness.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good. And if not, it is necessary to administer pertusin to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in itself.
of cracks in lips Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
When the cure for these cracks, as we have said in the divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery knife according to this form:
And place it quickly into those cracks until it comes to the surface;
after dress the wound until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the eye socket, or the palate, or to the roots of the teeth, after performing putrefaction and drilling and it has healed and become a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the sections, but it does not profit much: then you must have the fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the cavity or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it, and beyond it;
and do so one or two times after the treatment as we have said in treatments until he is cured;
and if it is treated thus, that is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the joint and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
and when the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it does not help, then put the tooth of the sick person in a healthy one. and heat the cautery whose form will be described later in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth.
and insert the hot cautery quickly inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after removing your hand, repeat the application of the cautery as you see fit;
after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it remain for an hour and thoroughly rinse.
And in such a manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
of the pain of teeth
When pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it may be necessary to use the cautery in two ways: and the wax cautery and the fire cautery.
The wax cautery is such that you take warm wax, and the end of it in a iron or tin spoon; after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and the marrow in butter boiled, and put on the tooth hurting quickly and hold until it be cooled;
and so do often until the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see soft wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron hot until the fire comes to the healing of the tooth.
The cautery altogether with fire is such that you take one stick of iron or charcoal, and be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
after heat the cautery, of which the form will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery be cooled;
Do this frequently, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cautery, and then quickly apply it.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And perform the cautery on whichever part you will, and according to what you have power to do;
and this is the form of the cane:
of the scrofula When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with coals as described below. It should have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or as needed, until it reaches the base of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and apply moist cloth soaked in butter until the burning is removed;
after treatment with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moist humors overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with liquefying medicines.
after you perform the fire cautery at the root of the throat, and guard that you do not come too close to the throat, but do not burn the heart, just a little.
After you perform the other fire cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which are called "claviles" be as we have shown their form before;
and treat it well as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and the disease of the stomach is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever nor drying, and if the disease is old, then perform two fire cauteries on the flanks in their sides. and for the other cautery place it between the two mamels;
and let the cautery called "clavile" be according to the form that is said beforehand.
And if you see, cauterize by pricking the whole cautery called "poins" whose form is described earlier in the illness of the ears.
and let the poins be just to XXX, or about that number.
After the treatment of the head as previously described, let there be three fire cauteries according to this form:
And since these cautery marks are lighter, because you make three in one application.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, anoint the patient's back and side. afterward, lift the kidney that is within the tickle with the thumb of your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two nooks where the form is:
and cauterize the heart until it bleeds to the point of collapse, and bring together the figure of the cautery with four cauteries;
and for this purpose, the cautery with three nooks is made, because the figure of cauterization consists of four cauteries;
and the nooks follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery with three nooks:
And sometimes it is adjusted over this first nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
after place the cautery over powdered brimstone mixed with salt; after causing the patient to rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little happens, then cauterize over the thick part of the cautery clave, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach to such an extent as it is contrary to his constitution, and there are many catharrs in him, and by the usual methods of treatment they do not profit, then it must be treated on his back, and he should extend his legs and his hands. After this, make three cautery marks over the heel with the quantity of a bean, for each cautery a knifelong, and two cautery marks above the two flanks such that the shape of the cautery marks be at three angles, and have space between each other so that they do not join together when putrefaction occurs.
and let the cautery be so perfect that it affects both sides of the knee, and let the shape of the cautery marks be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you wish to make a large cautery on the stomach according to this form;
and he who is afraid of this cautery, prick and bleed at the stomach i. point according to the quantity you see fit. then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "poins".
After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated with what we have said in the divisions, and it profits him not, then it must be that the patient is bled at his hue and cry. and mark three cautery marks according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, over the hypochondria, or where the costal regions of the body are located.
and there should be space between each cautery the size of a thumb; and let the cautery be as long as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire area of the cautery;
and let it be applied only to the halves of the heart, and let the patient lie straight on his back;
and if he cannot lie on his back, let him be supine and extend his legs, and lift his arms;
And if you wish to cauterize these from the cutaneous area, be subtle and skilled in the art, and beware that you do not burn all of the heart, for you would dry out the entire body; and it must not come to a boil, for the veins are very delicate at that place, and one must be careful to see.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
And when this treatment affects the membranes, it must be attended to at their source.
and then sign the place where the membrane or abscess is, and then heat the cautery to resemble fire, of which its form is as follows: And apply the cautery until the chords are burned, and proceed until the pus is completely drained;
after the treatment according to the cleansing of wounds until they are healed;
and it is not fitting to use this cautery except by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Then he may boldly operate, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave them alone.
For the fire cautery of pleursin.
The ancients said that one should make fire cauteries from roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the largest you can find, and let it be dried, and make it as thick and as long as your thumb; and the marrow in oil, and the imprint with fire, and cauterize with the fire cautery between the fossa and the neck, and two small cauteries a little descending in the part beneath the chin;
and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining a little backward; and one cautery between the buttocks, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the back below the buttock cautery that is between the shoulders;
and do not press with your hand much, but do it openly as in an operation.
And it is said that some ancient ones reported that no man uses the fire cautery to simulate shaving, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess. and when the pain is gone, as we have said for the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be cured.
from the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Of which there is a manner such that you make three or four cauteries, arranging them according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
and do not press your hand fully on the cautery, and let the patient's back be aware of it;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the two-ner hand cautery as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and lift the heart which is opposite the mouse, or where the cuts of the patient come towards the left. Let the elevations be such that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
After letting the two burning wicks become pierced on the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will be four.
And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery with three wicks.
After the treatment when it has gotten putrefaction over time, and it is good to change to another of the treatments mentioned before.
The cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
When you cure it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help much, then you must make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the nipple. and let the cauterizations be close to the tip of the wick.
After allow the cautery to remain open for putrefaction long enough, and do not delay the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and the healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be combined with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the claw we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as has been mentioned before.
When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsy patients and are full of yellowish fluid, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the annular. and hold your hand with the fire cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn to a fine ash, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After make on each leg two cautery marks at the point of the blade. and let the cautery marks be long, one above the knee frontward and the other backward, in the middle of the leg.
and leave the cautery marks long without treating them with a cure, for the wound to heal.
after the treatment of other wounds as we have said.
When the stomach fluid comes from cold and moisture, since the retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated with ordinary treatments. and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, make the great cautery on the stomach as he spoke of earlier or the stomach cautery, in the cautery it circles; and four small cauteries between the buttocks for each small cautery, and two on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the knife, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
for the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are large or multiple, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted fluids, and are treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help much, then make cauteries. Three on the spine of the back, the one which is just above the iliac crest a little and a little in triangular fashion, and two cauteries below the buttocks.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the fauce swelling, then apply a large cautery to the stomach, as was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the mesentery for the entire cautery. and let the cautery remain long enough. After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is healed.
When you cauterize the ulcer, heat the cautery to appear as hot as a ray of sun, and then place it fully burning over the ulcer being treated. and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which the blood flows.
do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, cauterize each as we have said. after the application of ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the elbow, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure a cut or incision, which we shall discuss in its place, comes such an illness that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When there is any fistula and is enveniled and filled with rotten moisture, you must probe it entirely with a sharp探针，并确保它穿过整个瘘管。并且你要知道整个探针的长度。
heat the cautery to resemble a rasp, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the pus has entered, and reapply the cautery until the rotten and corrupt flesh is burned, once, or two or three times, according to the quantity as needed;
and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not perform this outside the fatty flesh, and think that it is not dangerous.
after the treatment of the wound until it is healed, and if the eyes are sewed up and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the eyes are completely healed;
and if the materials are not removed, know that the eyes are badly injured, and the bones are damaged. and as we will say of those in their place.
When pain from cold comes with strong winds and does not affect a woman, then you must apply a cautery to both sides of the ribs using the clavile cautery as we have previously described.
and if we apply the cautery in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder, where the hairs begin at the base of the penis, both on the right side and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as one inch of our thumb.
and make the cautery below the spine, or two inches if you need to.
and let the cauteries be of the shape previously described.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupt and their termination delayed. and when they come, there is great pain. then it must be that three cauteries are made around the buttocks, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back.
and let the arm cauteries be as we have said.
When the viscous moists descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and if the vein from the department visc is found, it must be that you cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and drain before the vein inside the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle.
and if the cauteries are such as those from which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three cauteries of olive oil large, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the others;
and continue the treatment until he is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip socket, and this is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with bitter pills, or other good pills similar. After you do the fire cautery;
and the way of the cautery is according to two methods: it is known as a combination of burning medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is done in many ways, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form, and do them to good depth and large size, with an interval between each cautery equal to the width of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-colored.
sometimes one cauterizes in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, apply the cautery to the circle that we have mentioned before regarding the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the spots of the thigh be seared.
And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes as far as the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there or where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four doings, on the left side a little.
and let the cauteries be made with a lancet, and sear the thickness of the thigh.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two doings of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times with the cautery called "poins". And if the task is, let it do more;
And if the pain is from the knee to the thigh, then apply the cautery with a cutellaire or circular cautery. And in all your cauterizations, make sure not to leave the cautery on too long so as to burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
And I myself have seen many who applied the cautery to the ankle of the foot and left it on so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were perforated and corrupted. After a belly purge from which he died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, apply the cautery to both, according to this manner.
And the wise said about the cautery for the hip, in this manner: make the iron such that it is at the head as thick as a nail's head, or a bit less, and be interlaced and should be placed between the interlaces from one side to the other with an interval of the thickness of a thumb.
and let the clamps be over two parts, and be also like nuts, and have one iron hand well made;
and this is the form:
And be heated until it is completely red and emit heat, then place it on the socket of the injured hip, and turn it toward the healthy side.
and apply the cautery once the cautery is red and let it remain for three days; and then apply a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery little because of fear of its effect, and we see few who use it.
and any healthy person who can bear it, and leaves it where it afflicts.
The cautery for burning medicine is made by attaching the margins of the piece to a cross, and it should be either of tin or iron on one long side, and at the height of two palms, with each having the size of a thumb. and be opened out flat and above, and join together according to this form:
After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side on a clean surface, press your hand firmly over the hip box; after pouring between the two circles of the hot awe for a little while heated on fire, let the patient remain one hour or so, and suffer the heat and burning from it.
For he will find bites also like fire;
and when the bite has passed, withdraw your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it so for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the scalding is removed. and let it remain three days for the putrefaction to appear;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that fits wide according to what you have done for the hip equally;
and this is the way of the warm application, and I have written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. or if it has the small hole burst so that the tip of a razor can enter;
or if it has the small hole burst so that the tip of a razor can enter; and place it in another pot that is well sealed, and put on alkali and charcoal and a gentle application of warmth until there are two layers above the powders as you will have thoroughly prepared them by hand.
and leave it thus until the warmth and heat descend or it is well sealed, then take all of this warmth, and throw it on charcoal and alkali as before.
And then it will become very watery and is administered through many works of medicine and cauteries of other limbs.
For it makes great work like fires, and is used with other medicines whereby one cauterizes well the hip thus with honey, anacardium, wax, and soap; all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure for someone who was cured of hip pain and sciatic vein pain, and the good man, and he says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one time when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And it is said in such a manner that you take fresh and dry verdigris, and grind it a great deal with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and cover it;
and leaves it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then let him enter the bath until his body is a bit warmed up, and put him to bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such a fire cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheeps' fat, it helps much;
and the cautery should be made in such a manner. Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the depression between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
After taking sheeps' fat that is dry, and heating it on fire until it becomes coals, and placing it on the wool, and letting it be until it cools.
and do this again, and not cease doing so until you think by sense that it comes to the hip, and that the pain is ceased.
and this manner of cauterization is called "sheep cautery".
of the pain from the back
When pain comes to the back through falling or percussion or through excessive bloodletting or through similar spread of cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cautery, though it may be necessary for those caused by the infusion of cold matter.
It must be after that the patient is free of foul pills or other similar ones, upon his back, where the pain resides, three lines signed with enche, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and let the cauteries be done according to the cautery called "poins".
and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavicle according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight girth when they rise, and fear. and you find at the last spinal vertebra and in us the appearance that comes on other spinal vertebrae.
When you see this and find it cured, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form. So cauterize each part of the spine thoroughly and evenly.
And if you see it, cauterize between the spines with a sharp fire cautery for two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
After treat the limb until it is healed according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply a fire cautery in flesh where there is a space near a nerve.
of the pain from the joints
And when joint pains are due to moisture spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cautery in such a manner:
make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick the face of the foot, let the cautery be at the entire cautery where we claim "point. And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then let the cautery be done on each knee three or four of each part, all in an olive shape;
and if you have need of more, I will add more, but do not keep your hand out long that the fibers of the heart may be burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then apply the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points between the fingers two lines;
and if there remains pain in the thumb, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come as far as the elbows or as far as the shoulders, cautery each part, and make good governance of the patient and careful medicines.
For if you give him good governance and purge the humor, he will be healed with the help of God.
When rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs, and this is newly occurring, then it is necessary that when you intend to cure him, he does not eat at all that day; and when he uses things that purge the belly, so that the fæces descend from his belly;
after placing him on his back between your hands, and instructing him to lift his arm until the boil is healed, and you reduce it with your thumbs, and mark along the cut above the bone of the elbow, and make a sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery coal to form:
until it is white and emits scents. then reduce the boils in their place; and the minister lifts his hand so that it does not return behind;
and work well on the thighs of the patient, and place the cook and the servant over the thighs, and the other over the foot that gives pain to the hands;
then place the cautery at the mark on your hand, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you come to the bone; and carefully ensure that the boiling does not spill when you apply the cautery; so that you do not burn him; and lest thereby the patient die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you cannot reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it must be that the cauterizes for children are fine according to the measure of their size, and those for adults as large according to their measure;
after three days, cure the skin around the butter cautery until the scalding is removed;
after the cure with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well sewn.
and it must be that his bandages are left long enough so that the boils do not burst when he prepares to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage, and keep it for another forty days.
and let him have good rest, that he works little and avoids too great fulness from drinking and eating, and too loud shouting;
and when he follows this instruction, he is completely cured.
And I will say after the treatment to cut in his chapter.
When ruptures come to other wounds and are known, and you see that they do not increase, then make the fire cautery as much as the ruptures require, and let it be thirds of the wound. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
but mark the head of the wound with a sign and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and guide your cautery through both lines.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its size and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
if it is healed by the first cautery, it is well;
if this does not heal, restart with another cautery on that part, because such is the custom that it must change to the limb that is nearest, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Leeches are sometimes aided by cauterization with great help, especially for diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cannot the view be cauterized, take care that the disease is at the beginning, and that it is cured as we have said in the division, and neither spreads nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: I make the head new, and the other toward the front at the end of the hairline; and on the two horns, and one behind on the humerus;
and let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the bone, and let it stay until the bark is removed so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.
and cauterize on the mouse according to what is said before.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly ineffective, then you must cauterize with the cauteries we have said or chief, and one on the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the scapula and another below, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the shins, and two on the tendons of the foot, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and take care of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so you do not burn them;
and once the fire cautery is done on the bone of the forearm, one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more fire cauteries you perform, the more help you provide, and they profit from it;
And know that the sick do not feel pain from the fire cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you will find in the manner of the irons.
After the cure, apply a dressing of flour with honey and other dressings until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not fully healed, then make cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterizations be a bit inside the edge of the knee. then treat with poultices until it is healed.
And once the cauterization is done using the cautery, the hand, and the back, at the site of the nerve that renders the limb numb, then the swelling is relieved.
and in any case, no one should intervene unless they know about the limbs and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is ripe, and medical means are of no avail, then cauterize with a slightly hot cautery according to the thickness of the crust, until the whiteness is gone and its color changes.
then apply a dressing of flour of vervain and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from colt and blood from alondra, of each a part. and mix all together, and wrap with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
the cauterization treatment for a chancre
When a chancre begins to appear, and you see it stopping, cauterize with a circular cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
And all the same, the sage said that a cauterization should also be done at the middle of the sore.
and in every way I find it not good, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once.
and more improperly, it should be cauterized between, in the cautery called "circule," as we have said when discussing cauteries.
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death due to the excess it produces or the age of the patient (that is, too old), and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten its death: then cauterize between much of small cauteries while pricking; after let them grow thus. Car she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it from above in such a way that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a corruption of the member, for it eats away at the limbs as fire does to dry wood.
If you see this disease in a patient who can endure fire altogether, then heat the cautery tips very small and large, according to what is fitting for the patient or where the disease is;
after cauterizing from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and let nothing of it remain, that all which is corrupt be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and place sore-wrapping with oil on the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the application of ointments producing flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good.
and if not, then resume the cauterization on what remains corrupt from the disease.
And this mixture has sometimes been cured with medicinal water instead of the fire cautery;
but still, the fire cautery is more effective, and I have already mentioned the treatment with medicinal water in the division: take the quantity you need.
of corns that come from the feet Many times it happens that from the feet, through corns, a disease arises called "clous" according to our understanding, and it is a large, hard thing that causes pain in the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, the fire cautery, and the cauterization with hot water.
The fire cautery is that you heat the cautery tip as if it were a pen of vaulted iron, and it should be made of good iron to fit the nail in all directions, and there should be fine margins.
afterwards, place it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail. and let him remain thus for three days until he begins to develop putrefaction; then apply a plaster of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the sore will close and be uprooted from its roots.
Then anoint the limb with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fires in the body, and this often happens in burns and wounds, you must apply a hot water cautery to it. and it is in such a manner: take a needle of iron or a quill of vulture, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, for removing warts. and place the cane there until it bleeds completely around, then put a bit of hot aw, hold your hand well, and press your hand turning such that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot fluid deep way to the root;
and let the patient endure a bit the hot fluid bite for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will wither away from all its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you dry all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that produce flesh.
When some tremble from cold or chills, or from a quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four or four fire cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and for the cautery of fire or pestilence, and above the stomach with the olive cautery;
if it lets [the hair] grow, and hastens the healing of the cold illness.
At times apparent by inspection of the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large corrupt matters.
if it is necessary to perform a cautery on each head of the pustule as soon as they appear. a subtle cautery of juniper wood, the points of which are heated by fire, or of the root of angelica, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery should be performed at the beginning when they first appear in this manner, and they do not grow into tumors but the excess is relieved, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
many times there are great bleeding episodes from the artery that is cut during the wound, or in incising an abscess, or with the fire cautery on the member, and similar things. and it is most grievous to smell.
And in any case, when it happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the bleeding subsides beneath your finger, and no more blood comes out.
then heat the olive fire cautery, both small and large, until they are all red.
then apply I, whether great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cautery at that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is thoroughly coagulated.
And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are still hot, so take one of the other cauteries quickly which are over the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is thoroughly coagulated;
and watch that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flow from the artery stops, you cannot coagulate it well by itself when the artery is large, unless it is one of the four ways that we have said: or by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicaments placed there that have the power to draw out blood; and may it be tied and held in place.
Who administers astringent treatments with tightly wrapped cloths or places burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then do not proceed.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no mirror or medicine at hand, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but frequently moisten the vein with cold water that it may become very cold until the blood is frozen and drawn up.
and make incisions in front of the places where he needs cauterization and medicaments.
We have told you in the first chapter where fire cautery or cautery of burning medicine is needed for all diseases, and the oquisons and their causes and the instruments and the forms of the cauteries;
and have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go through this chapter by the same way so that one finds it more easily.
And since I begin this one, you must, dear friend, know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on fire cautery, and because of this, it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you not undertake folly. For many people come for treatments in various ways. if they come from those who are so affected by their illness that they die slightly because of the severity of the disease and the greatness of their wickedness; and from these one should have fear.
And from these it is who give you their sense, and say: wait, I am cured"; and the disease is spiteful.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you and have this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not rashly give out what you are certain of and which you can verify.
and use prognostic and indication in the treatment of your patients for whom health may be restored;
and this will help you to gain a good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Very dear son, May our Lord give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to receive the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing it section by section, as in the chapter on fire cautery, which I previously discussed from the head down to the feet, because you find it easier to understand what you need.
Know that this disease often comes to children during birth, and when the pincers grip too tightly on the head of the child.
and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown that we cannot determine.
And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among those I have seen, death came quickly. And because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the work in partial treatments.
And I saw that the head of the shoulder was full of fluid, and the swelling increased each day to the point where it could no longer be borne.
and the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture is gathered around the bone above the syphilis, between the knee and the bone.
and the operations must be such that if the moisture is between the knee and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a wide incision through the swelling.
and let it be as long as two of our fingers, so that the moisture can drain.
and behold the form of the spatillum:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see at the corners of the head open for each part, and the liquid spurts out when you press it from within with your hand, and this does not please you: it must be that you split the head into three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outwards. After covering the incisions with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days;
then release it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head dry increasingly. Then give the patient dried meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look for or open the largest part of the abscess, and the collection of pus;
for it should never be in front; nor behind; nor on the right side; and never on the left side.
Cut then the skin or the abscess open, and the collection of pus, and the hole according to what you can do;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and there is a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When a person has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the testicle, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is the cautery with those where they will cauterize the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them copulate, after rubbing the shoulder with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then squeeze the patient's collar tightly with all the cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the glands on both sides are behind the ears, and some are repositioned;
then mark the glands with a sharp spatulum on both sides, cutting the vein until it reaches the bone, and this should be done at the widest part of the shoulder.
And if you see, place the spatula blade over the artery and cut above it, cutting as twice through.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open with pressure, you must measure the quantity of three pennies, then mark the glands and cut until the bone.
and what must be removed from the blood is six [cups], and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery;
then examine the wound: if there remains a point of suppuration on the bone, and the abscess does not break out, then incise the wound and dress it, treating it with ointment until it heals.
From the vein. When old vein disease comes, and acute cataract, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and ancient scarred fever and similar things, and these are treated with methods of medicinal treatments, yet none of this benefits them, then extract the arteries in the temples and apply cauterizations, as we have recounted.
And the method for extracting them is that the patient should sit back and pull out the hairs from his temples, and feel for the artery which appears in the temple, for it protrudes well through its pulsation, and is only slightly displaced in some very cold individuals.
and if it is applied, draw the neck of some of the patient's clothes tight, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and apply the area to warm water until the arteries are clearly visible. then take the spatula of copper that has this form: then cauterize the skin lightly until you see the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and separate well all the threads that are beneath each part;
and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the awl, then cut that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. For if it is not cut, it will never heal completely.
and draw blood from six parts, until three.
and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong silk threads, doubling the thread, so that corruption does not occur before the sudden opening of the wound, and to prevent the flow of blood.
then remove the excess that is between the two threads at that very hour, and then, if you see fit, apply the cautery of the surgical fire until the head of the shoulder is removed.
and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and is of warm complexion. For the cauteries are helpful to finish the moistures: for it is of greater help in removing moistures.
For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the shoulder with old cotton and place it over well-made pads;
and when one releases them, it should be cleansed with dry medicinal substances that promote flesh growth, and with pads, until it is healed;
and if there is no clot in the artery as you work, hasten to cauterize it with fire, or fill the shoulder with vitrified earth and squeeze it with your hand so that it dries up; and if you do not have this at hand, place something cold over the shoulder until the clot is frozen, and remove the shoulder from cold water until the clot persists, and hold it steady as needed;
And it should have between the two knives a thickness of good width, and when you have signed to join the two ends, then place the hot iron there until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; and let them be separated between the two heads because they are not entirely soldered by this cautery from end to end;
and this is the form of the cautery:
and he who is more moved and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery in two parts, but let the cutting be well thick to keep their heat longer. For when the instruments are too cold, they hold less heat.
of tears When tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the bridge of the nose, and applying medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel trembling or shivering on the forehead as if with fever; and when the eyes are held and moist such that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, it has need of this treatment. And the ancients called it "bruised wound treatment," and what you do is to apply this remedy to the patient who has this illness, regardless of whether he has hair or not on his forehead, then make three equal divisions or cuts along the length of the forehead.
And the ancients called it "bruised wound treatment," and what you do is to apply this remedy to the patient who has this illness, regardless of whether he has hair or not on his forehead, then make three equal divisions or cuts along the length of the forehead. and let one of the cuts be as deep as the other two all the way down to the bone, and the others two on the sides above the eyelids, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on the sides above the eyelids.
and move your hand away from the continuity of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the size of three douzièmes joined.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and some cloth to wipe away the blood, then apply the sharp side of the spatula from which it is formed.
from the incision which is below the temple to the second incision; and cauterize the entire heart that is between the two grooves to the full thickness of the septum which is over the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract the spatula. if you insert into the first incision the instrument called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is rough, not sharp, and this is its form:
And place the scalpel cutting edge towards the buttock side of the wound, and the rough edge towards the bone, and continue inserting it until it reaches the middle incision.
and cauterize all the vessels that descend to the eyes until the incision is continuous to those that appear in the heart, then do the same from the middle groove to the other groove.
and then draw off the blood evenly, and press out the flesh for the blood drawn;
then place a tent of old cloth in each crack, and cover with wet cloths in wine and oil and grease, and keep the abscesses warm from swelling.
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply great dressings with hot water, then treat with an ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
When someone frequently comes with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening of vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where the head is caused by pain to produce a cold sweat, and the patients sneeze; then know from these accidents that those materials and the humor come forth from many veins, and what is purged, this is it.
And you instruct the patient to lie on their back behind their forehead, then make a large incision between the forehead, and another slightly wider one. And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the cut up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dress between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, and linen; then bind above with moist cloths of wine and oil, and beware of hot abscess.
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with excisive substances to promote growth.
In somewhat this manner: take 2 parts of flour of wheat, and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to the wounds to promote growth of flesh throughout.
of the stopping up of the ears
Everything that falls into ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or mineral stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, like grains of wheat, beans, peas; or effluent matter such as water and fat or similar things.
When it falls into the ear as a stone or some other substance that does not attach to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, and it distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and cause the patient to sneeze by coughing, and plug the nostrils when the sneezes come, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and stuff the ear with something above it.
Many times comes pus through this wound;
and if it does not come through, the extraction with fine forceps is administered, of which this is the form:
If it bursts with the forceps, that is good;
and if not, the extraction is administered with a fine needle of small gauge;
and if it does not burst with that, make a spider's web and place the head of the web or the ear hole firmly, and plug what is around the web with soft wax so that the pus cannot enter with the web. then let it burst in the form of a hole, for many times pus comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come forth in any manner, take glue of gum and take the tweezers, and put therein some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton between; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and draw forth.
And if it does not come forth from all these things that we have said, hasten to incise the ear as one would an abscess or boil, and spasm.
and the manner of incision is that you first anesthetize the patient with the shoulder joint, and extract some blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends. and let the cut be as wide as the moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth.
and continue the treatment until he is healed.
And if it is a grain that is enclosed and swollen, administer the extraction;
and if it cannot come out, administer the spatule with a thin blade according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces.
then extract it with thin forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the earwax that falls into the ear, the patient should use nose blowing to clear the first conditions, and clean the ear with old cotton. And let them lie on that same ear where the wax is. If it falls out forcefully through that, it is good.
if not, take many stones according to the length of your strong and light fingers, and heat them slightly on the fire; and place one or two of the stones in his ear, and strike from another side with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to strike stone on stone until the heat is gone, and thus it will be completely cooled.
and if you see, take a rush, and place one of the heads in the ear, and the other head near the fire until the sharper rush is burned.
then repeat with other rushes until the heat is gone, as we have said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of the arrow, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is of large size and can be felt, use the extraction with forceps; and it is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and concerning distillation, and if the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear with the sun. if there are no worms apparent, extract them with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, use the wire of the form.
And it is narrow inside and wide outside. And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then proceed further along the entire canal; Do this often enough that all the worms emerge.
And if they do not obey to come out, stuff the canal with cotton as I have said in the section on the stone.
And if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, administer distilled solutions that the ancients have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find them in treatises on distilled solutions.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which the form is as you see: And let it be made of fine silver or brass over the small openings, and above the tube for distillation;
and to press within the distillation with an apparatus of well-made brass, and if you wish take a razor and wrap the tip with appropriate cotton; then throw in your oil or juice, and the medicine that you wish into the tube, and the tube be in the ear;
then pour over the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or movement in the ear ceases; and let the patient sense it internally, and let the distillations be slightly heated on the fire as if one were distilling in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the remedy would not be so good.
of the stopping up of the ears
No child is born who has no perforations in the ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound obstruction or a tumor growing inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes do not permit any passage in the ear, so one cannot see them.
and sometimes there is only a small opening in the perforation, and the light can be seen well.
That which sometimes does not permit any passage, and one cannot see it, is of great concern for treatment in many ways, and in such cases, you should place the ear of the patient in the sun. and look within: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all of this spatumile of which this is formed:
And let it be sharp and cutting both front and back entirely clean, so that it does not damage the ear;
if the operation is on flesh born or a tumor of the ear, then use fine forceps, and gently cauterize it, so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the purgation is performed in the ear, take the fine scissors lightly and heat them a little with fire, then place them on the part of the ear.
If you sense the operation where the patient feels damaged in the ear, pierce gently, and make sure you do not injure the nerves of the ear;
then place a tent according to the width of the perforation, and fill it with Egyptian ointment. Do this until the wound is healed, or take a tent and fill it with rose water ointment, and powder on broken glass.
and if you see the ear swollen, it is fitting that you change the tent and apply another ointed tent made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is gone. then treat it until it is healed.
And if bloodletting comes, plunge a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments which remove the flow of blood that are or treat by distillation.
This method for dealing with eye ailments that come from papers when they are moist and then dried, it is fitting that you spread them with forceps and tweezers, and cover them with a spatulum made of its roots. then place over the joint pulverized glass.
And if without debriding, cauterize with the thin lentile cautery, and after incising, move it.
and many times they heal, since nothing remains of their roots. and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the gravel Many times on the eyelids come small things that appear like hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of moisture large on the inner and outer surfaces of the eyelid. the operations are such:
the operations are such: take care that the patient is silent on both sides, and this is a light matter to know;
make the incision wide, then burn each part lightly, then take it with forceps, and close.
if you cannot close it without piercing a little the paper, do not harm the patient;
and if the wound is large, suture it, and treat until it heals;
and if it is small, do not缝合, 因为药物会很快治愈它并生成肉芽组织。
And if the small bone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the grain in tongs, and hold it pressed from one side and another.
and if the paper is displaced by the incision, it matters not;
and when the small bone is cut, rinse the eye with salty water, and treat the area with what causes flesh to heal until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is embedded in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly affects their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears flow rapidly into their eyes.
and because of this they lie down under their pillows, and sleep there, and have their cloths underneath their damp sorceries that swell them and make them appear covered by the exudate which appears in the eye. And when you press on the head between your hands and feel the exinach within.
And the manner of the work is that the patient places their head on your side;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that the exudate from each part contains, then place it under them; and press with your hands on both sides, so that the exudate be collected within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture a slit with a sharp knife, and let it not be any wider than the incision we make in the healthy vein;
and let the skin come through completely as you reach the exterior; and from several positions, the exterior comes through the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract it then with all a piece of cloth between your two fingers at the wound, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed;
and be careful not to touch in the wound, that you do not come to all the spatumile up to the eye, that you do not damage it.
And if the exterior does not come through at the beginning of the wound, then enlarge a bit the wound slightly until it comes through.
then extract as we have said, then wrap in cloth and in water, and place on the spot, and extract with bandages.
And if such men who grind grain and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat until it is healed.
And if an hot abscess comes to its head, apply the cure of plasters soothing until it is healed.
of the hairs of papers When hairs grow on paper other than those naturally there, and are mature, they harm the eyes, and bring about conditions like accustomed tears, softenings of the paper, and alginate, to such an extent that it is a cause for the destruction of the eyes;
and it is treated according to four methods: or by fire cautery alone, or by a water remedy as suited to the case, according to the chapter on cautery. And it is done either by incision and缝合, or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary to place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
If it is converted, that is good; if not, prick with a needle along the thread. and let this mark be on the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow among these hairs, and draw the thread upward across the entire paper, and cut it with scissors.
then cut in the part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, to the entire spatumile cutting from the large tear until the small one.
then draw out the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sprinkle on the paper an image of an oak leaf, as the bay leaf, and always it must be that the image is according to the quantity that you see removed from the paper which is divided for all.
And if for some who needs it one should use a cop of great quantity of the paper according to those that the paper is softened;
then make at all the spot on the two lines that you have sprinkled, and begin from the large drop until small. and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then place an ounce at one of the two corners of the wound, then burnish it completely.
then join the two edges with a stitch using a needle and a thin wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make the excess threads on the two cords dry by any sticky substances, if you wish to do this.
and if you do not wish to do this, then do not worry about the stitch and threads for three days or four.
then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and binding substances, for paper heals suddenly from the wound and its joining, but the stitch rots (as the old ones said), and this is work without fear. and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as large as the leaf of laurel, as we have said, three inches severed according to the form which is here:
then apply those which surpass the small forces equally according to the form which is given here:
And if you cannot hold the forceps steady, and the thing is not quite equal, take an needle or thread, and pass it through the figure; and pass the other thread through the large hole, and the second thread through the small one, and join the threads evenly between your two.
then withdraw your hand evenly, and remove all the skin where you have signed, as we have said, then join the two edges of the wound by suturing, and continue to treat until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, treat it with cerate and similar soothing ointment;
and sometimes the hair of the patient changes:
then you must use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitch in both places is more artificial.
The treatment of arrow wounds is according to this form: and you must change the shoulder and the wound inside according to what I have said, and then make two arrows and two fine threads as long as the shoulder and as wide as the width of the splinter is; and hold the head of the shoulder where you hold the bones;
then join the two subtly above what surmounts from the membrane of the eye, and hold the two canals of the two parts firm. and let it be thus for some days, and the skin which is constrained will die, wither, and fall off, until it sheds by itself.
If it delays, then apply force to realign it, and treat it until it is healed.
and when the wound is sewn, and the membrane is lifted, the hairs will no longer grow.
and these are the forms of the two cans you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
the operations are such that you insert a fine needle, and thread the细丝线 through it: then assemble the heads and tie them both finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm in length:
then arrange another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the thread:
then place the patient's head on your side:
and place it away from the sun so that the operations are clear, for this is a delicate and small operation. Then insert the needle along the base of the added hair, and pierce through the paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair:
then extract the hair until above the socket, and place that hair in the socket if there is one or two or three or more.
then extract your hand until the hairs grow out completely covering the socket with natural hair.
And if the socket is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, draw the socket out through all the thread that you have ordered, until the socket grows through completely and you see it with the eye's vision.
then draw the socket and the thread, close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh heals.
and if the hairs are small, accompany them with long natural head hairs, and remove them together with that or where you leave them, until they grow long, then let them go.
of the putrefaction of the oil When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or corruption, comes to the eye, there are two ways of it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a fire cautery, and similar things.
And the method of the work in it is that you cut the seam, separate the edges of the wound, and place linen tents inside, and bind it until it heals.
and it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will become worse than the first.
but in the work of things that soften, as with fenugreek; and the application of an aloe or aleoette and boiled flaxseed, and unguents melted in any of these, and it wraps them in a cloth, and treats them with this.
And your treatment must be such that you ensure it does not heal improperly according to the form it had before.
and this work that we have said is not far from remedies for this illness, that it does not return according to the form it had before.
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and cuts and fire cautery and similar things;
and the way of the work in this is that you take a needle, which has a double thread, and pierce the vein from left to right so that the threads come out at two heads of the flesh;
then the flesh is above the needle, and the cork is wide at the handle. And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good;
And if not, take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts along the edge of the paper;
and let the heads of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision you have made be such that when they are assembled, the figure shall be as that of a letter which has the shape of an "I".
then remove that flesh according to the amount that his costs are gangrenous, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts with a thread of wool;
then apply the treatment of what we have said regarding softening medicines and tents until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or suture or fire cautery, it is necessary that you make a full cut beneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what is mentioned before. then draw off between the two flaps of a tent, as I have said;
then draw off between the two flaps of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is extremely varied in form, and the masters prepare devices with all their skill to make the limb return to its natural form;
and the patient themselves, according to what needs to be done and the instruments in various preparations.
When this suture occurs in the hand in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural work, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper and lift it up.
and hold with the forceps, until you extract what is at the margin of the scapula, which should not be too hard nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the scapula being too hard and bruising the eye;
and let your incision be such that you lightly cauterize the assembled tissue, so that the skin heals according to its natural form.
and let the entire assembly heal, and do not apply any salted brine to the eye, but use sweet water and vinegar.
then place between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and put over the eye a moistened wool cloth soaked in egg white. and after the third day use a collar and dark things until he is healed.
The nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and similar to hard scurf, and another that is not nervous but is similar to white frozen moisture, such that when touched with iron and carefully treated with tweezers, it cannot be removed.
and both resemble starting from the large lid and gradually increasing a little by little until they cover the entire view and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the way of incision is that the patient places their head on your lap, then opens their eyes. and lift the paper with your hand, then place the nail clipper at the tip, and hold it above; then take an needle, and put the hair of a horse, or a cow, or a bull, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, and pierce it completely with the entire needle, and bind the nail with a thread and hold it above, and burn along the side of the nail where the hinge and silk are located up to the tip, then cut away the remainder at the root of the thorn with subtle and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or thorn, so that by incision the body does not produce tears accustomedly.
and sometimes the nails grow on their own at the root, and along the vein, as we have said. then after the burn, we have all the spatumile soup of which this is formed:
And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced;
and after the incision, pour some of the sifted salt into the eye, and from a cologne made of litharge, and let it remain until the next day; then continue the treatment as needed until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the quills cannot enter it, often this resemblance of a nail is treated with medicines.
and grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it healing, operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula slightly sharp a little according to this form: And reset the nail delicately from above, and if you see that it diminishes at all and the root presses on it, distill into the irritable eye made of litharge and red collyrium and salt, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is against it in the eye, such as an abscess, then let it be, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
then continue the other operation according to this same procedure until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the eye through great injury, suspend it with a fine thread and operate on a part of it, not too much, so that no tears arise.
then distill into the eye a red collyrium which is made of litharge.
Some men's eyes once produce red chalk, and cover the pupil and are restrained on papers and turned upside down, seeming like a water-lily blossom;
and the procedure is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, then closes their eyes, and lets all that chalk run down with suitable needles to this effect, and holds it with force.
then take out the first chalk, and continue scraping with the razor until the end, and be sure not to injure the eye in the process.
and make the incision in the space under the nail as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small forces by which one removes the scab, as the text forms after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with a sieve or you may distill it with red colchicum or similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a piece of wool with an egg yolk, so that an abscess hot forms.
and if nothing remains, and the abscess rises to the surface, and you suspect an abscess that is hot, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that alleviate a hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do for the bones set in the eye by this method.
But always it must be that you ease the treatment of each weak eye by natural means. and from the way of accident, in the work of iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that limb is suffering from this work.
If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, and affect vision and weaken the eye for all days.
Therefore, for the first thing you should look to see if the eye, in which sebel is located, is out of place, and there is no other disease except the sebel; then manipulate it in such a way:
instruct the patient to place their head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins at every inch according to your wisdom, and let the inches be subtlely doubled according to this form:
And let them be one ounce by degrees in the body according to this form:
then you should carefully draw out those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour until you see the veins recede from the eye.
and make sure not to damage the eye with the points of the spatumiles, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not harm those veins.
and when you have done this, instill in the eye drops of green and red safron to corrupt what remains of the swelling.
And if you cannot draw out all the swelling in that hour, apply a poultice to the eye using things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of the warm abscess. Then resume this method as described until it is healed.
and this is the form of the forces:
They are called "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it with fire cautery and medicine of burning water as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, then you must indeed make an incision over the abscess, in the place where it should be lanced, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then scrape it with all the instrument of which this is the form:
and it is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of hard iron for the head, and be pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
And place on the head of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a bit so that you know that the corruption is removed;
and do this once, then restore the head with medicinal desiccants.
if the bones are set, and flesh arises, and the core of the wound is set, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not re-open and is not at all abscessed, and no bad accident happens, know that it is healed;
if not, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and by means of cold medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the file according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the stake be thin until the tip as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the eye, and keep your hand a little distance from the eye. Then turn the file all around until it pierces the bone, and let the patient feel it through the pain if you keep your hand on your nose.
and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens around the bone, the matter will come to the surface. if it is a more gentle matter for the patient.
When the eyes are completely opened, and there is no obstruction or reduction, then you must bind the patient.
then the healthy eye, then apply suction cups or a plaster without piercing to extract fluid, then place on the eye the site made of myrrh and aloes and incense and saffron, and then moisten the eye, and dress with bandages and cloths.
and the method of cloths is that you take soft cloths, and fold each one into four, then place them one over the other according to the amount the eyes require.
then draw it out from above with a hard bandage, and resume the cups to suction without causing injury;
then remove the cups and let the eye be held steady day and night, and if the ligaments soften, you must hold it tightly.
then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good.
if not; then resume the ointment and dressings, and the bandage and cups until it is healed.
of the tearing of woollen cloth or skin When disruptions come in the retina, then open and come forth through the papers as grains of resin, and is terrifying to see.
then if you see it cover, the operations are such that you stick an needle into the root of the part below until the one above, then stick another needle or have a doubled thread from the part under the eye; and do this, and leave the first needle in place according to the disposition;
then draw the doubled thread through and tie a part of the uve around it, and hold it tight, then remove the needle and put on the eye a moistened piece of cloth from an egg yolk;
and leave it until the thread ties with the uve, then treat the eye with things that comfort it until the wound is healed;
and sometimes the wound is restrained by the eye in each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes have a great appearance, pierce them with a sharp needle that comes from the front of the eye, and drain the white moisture and quickly insert them.
then extract them until they are healed.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by water that assembles in the eye, resembling descending aqueous fluid, and it is not actually aqueous.
and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on the prepared seat and upright. Then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move the jaw until you see the water come above your eyes. then it should be pierced, and not descended and the light should be removed, and show the patient the things as he used to.
and if it does not descend from above, know that it is acute, and if the descents of the bowel are not prepared as we have said.
seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal membrane slightly along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bowel comes out.
and when it has come out, instill into the acute eye warm honeyed melon juice, or boiled fenugreek water and honey, then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
of the eye's waters We have found the appearances of fevers in the division, and what must be done for piercing; if done according to health.
It must be that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, and bind the healthy eye very tightly.
then place the cloth of oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right.
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right.
then place the tip of the instrument between the corona by the thickness of a hair in that part of the eyelid at the minor lacrimal gland, then apply the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and twist your hand until it pierces through the part of the eyelid, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place;
and the size of the almagda should be exactly the size of the space from the prunel to the end of the nictitating membrane; and this is the corona of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument there where the sharpness is, and withdraw it along one path after another.
if the liquid flows now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a short while, and if the fluid rises again by the second route, apply pressure with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, gently extract it by turning your hand little by little around.
and then put a bit of red thread in water, and take the needle out. Then put cotton or moistened wool in oil and abundant egg, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Now, and those of our time, place on it a compress with abundant egg.
And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which the form is as follows:
And pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it a fine incision, then gently extract it, as we have said.
and for the completion of the work, arrange for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark place.
and it should be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to its position until three days.
then release it in that same dark house, and test its sight, and show it some things, and then rebind it until the seventh day.
and it is not fitting that you do this during the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but you must anesthetize them, because the fluid rises quickly.
if abscesses appear, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and follow the treatment for what alleviates the abscess.
and when it is pacified, release the eye and place it on its face I with a border to cover any day, and let it be in that dark house.
And then leave the house little by little, and return to its place;
and know that no clerks should intervene in this case. And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda puncts, which they applied with water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about them in the books of the ancients. and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, for he who does not know them will be deceived;
and let it be properly of the spider: And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
Sometimes there arise or do not arise joint swellings of various kinds, some of which resemble scorpions' stings.
and if there are such cases where the joint is fixed due to a black color, and where the joint is swollen of a good color. In the case of these joints that are swollen but not fixed, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun.
In the case of these joints that are swollen but not fixed, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun. and fumigate his nostrils, and sprinkle the joint with an ounce of this, and draw it out. pues cope ceu que tu em puis sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’una part, tant que tu saiaches que celle char est toute ostitée.
And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open it with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains. and if without surmounting it, or an abscess forms, apply the aid as it should.
and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the flesh be removed, then apply a cold cloth or vinegar or wine. If the poultice works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed;
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, to which the instruments cannot come to cut:
then you must insert a bit of thick flax thread, and knot it with our hands, leaving between each knot some space or less. and place the patient's head on the thread so that it can bear, and pull gently until the thread comes out through the nose into the mouth.
and many times they do so with children at school, and it is a light matter for him who knows how to do it.
then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after another as we who are by the thread.
Make it thus that you know the bone has corrupted that flesh, then draw the thread, wipe away the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back again to the nose as before.
do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of flesh;
and then put to the nose one reed of frankincense for several days until he is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which one distills oils and medicines to the nose:
And let it be of silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a reed, and guide it thus;
and if you see, make a closed incision, and let the instruments be full for purging the head;
and hold the head with your hand when heating the oil or any liquid.
from the head over the nose
Many times, in the head near the nose, a disease arises called "telul," grows and becomes large, so that it can be seen when looked at.
and for this, you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it completely, then apply the fire cautery or burning medicine over it.
and if you delay cutting it while it becomes large, then observe whether it is hard, of fugitive color, or of poor sensation.
if he does not touch it with iron at all because it is an abscess attached, for when it is pricked even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is due to a burn and not from a discharge of color, and you can completely prick it, then empty the patient and prick it without fear, and treat the area with drying and contracting substances.
When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilages in the work, it profits little, for in some men.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two edges with sutures, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the edges are already separated on both sides, then it is necessary to scorch all parts of their roots until they heal, and then adjust the two edges with sutures, and bandage them, and sprinkle with powdered dragon's blood, and burned incense. and place a piece of plaster of strong or another binding plaster on the powders, and leave it until it heals by itself, then treat with ointment until he is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in suturing the abdomen; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of lips
By hand, abscesses in the lips appear hard, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips, and incise each nodule, and take it with forceps and divide it into each part;
then apply the linen after the incision of the vitreous humor, until the bleeding is staunched;
and then apply linen of alder, and cure the linen with dry substances until it is clean.
Many times a hard lump arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
then you must hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and let the tooth or blood flow.
then place on the linen over the vitreous humor incision, or other constricting and drying powders.
and if that lump returns after the incision, and this happens many times, then cut it again, and cauterize it. if it does not return after the fire cautery;
Sometimes they are assembled at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums and the skin that is ugly and harsh. and sometimes they are the black and yellowish rotting teeth, as the corruption comes to the gums, and they stink.
it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and his head on your lap, and examine the teeth or the skin that appear until there remains nothing. and thus examine the blackness and the greenish tint, and the jaundice and other marks until they are cleaned.
and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, resume from the second day and the third, until you have done everything;
and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to extract them, according to what the operation shows, for the forceps used to extract broken teeth have other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you prepared.
and when you treat the tooth of its pain, you should delay the extraction as much as you can, for it must not be done hastily. for this is a substance most high just so we have no excuse for erasing.
Then when the patient is constrained to extract, it must be that you are certain of the tooth causing pain. many times the pain afflicts the patient, and he believes it is due to Saint's tooth, and makes them draw the good tooth. and in every way the pain does not cease from the patient until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already tried to do this to these saints.
and when you are certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary to scorch around the tooth with a hot iron to protect the gum from all sides.
then pull it out with your tweezers or fine forceps at first slight pull and tug, until it is well loosened, then firmly set the forceps. and let the shoulder of the patient be on your holy lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After drawing the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and put it in each part lightly, and move it as you have done before.
and if the vein is pierced and cut, it must be filled with lint, linen or the wounds. and if you grip it delicately with the tongs, so that it does not break when gripping it;
and you must carefully cut into the gum to extract the tooth.
And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part of it, as this can cause the patient greater pain than the initial one due to the malice of the root.
And be careful that you do not do so as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the bone sometimes, and do not apply what we have described.
but they bring it once by the incision of that great disease due to the roots remaining, or to the decay they break, as we often desire.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the socket with wine or ale and salt;
and if the bleeding continues, which often happens, apply the socket of vitriol powder;
and if that does not stop it, cauterize.
The shapes of the instruments, which one uses to draw the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you draw the tooth.
and these are the forms: And let them be of large limbs such that they do not bend in the stretching, and made of iron well forged, and with teeth to hold fast.
from the root of the teeth And when the root remains during drawing, it is necessary to place moistened cotton wool in butter on the shoulder for one or two days until the shoulders are softened. Then remove the tongs called "algefri," which seem like the beaks of storks.
and may they also be made as in a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out through all these clamps, you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a palanche, and that is its form.
And let it be long and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through this, that is good.
and if not, use all the instruments, of which the forms are given hereafter:
And if aid is needed from this instrument that has two handles, which is the form of it: and other instruments that are in front by reason of the teeth, and from this instrument which seems like large forceps, of which is its form:
And let this instrument not be broken, for you shall know that many dental instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not recounted;
and the master surgeons, by their own subtlety, find their instrument, according to those works and the disease that show them, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of bones. If they break a limb or other bone, it rots, so they seek the instruments that fit, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which the form is this:
And let them be large and well-designed to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed;
and then restore the head with appropriate medicine, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, remove it with all this instrument:
When a tooth appears not in accordance with its natural position, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the tooth has grown out after the others and is not in the right place, and cannot be straightened or filed.
then use the probe; and if it is pierced with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is described, and which resembles a small beak, and let it be made of sharp iron.
And file it little by little in your hand each day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that you can file it, then file it with a small file as described.
and is also like the file with which needles are made;
and scrape the tooth a little bit at a time with your fingers gently, so that it does not move until it comes loose.
then shave the end of the tooth fully at the last. If the tooth is too sharp and turns the tongue black, you must scrape off the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not turn the tongue black nor corrupt speech.
When the front tooth aches due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot keep food down, and you have treated it with restrictive medicines, then this is ineffective.
if they must be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
and let the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to thread the needles, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the eyes of the needles between the molars, as many as you can see clearly until reaching the other healthy tooth. then continue the covering until you reach the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and clearly, so that it does not move.
and keep your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
then clip the eyes of the thread with tweezers, and assemble them, and pass them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not irritate the tongue.
and then let it remain so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens or the threads break, you must tighten it with another thread;
if it remains and serves so throughout its entire duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, as well as the two molars, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, replace it in its place frequently, as we have said;
and do not attempt it with anyone who is not skilled and suffering, and only once the form of a tooth of ivory is made, you place it in the spot where the tooth is missing, and you tighten it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this comes from the tongue or nature itself, that one is born thus. or by accident of a healed wound;
and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have their head on your lap, and lift their tongue;
then cut the nerve ligament, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is suddenly due to a wound, then use the sickle knife and cut that ligament;
and ensure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery is underneath;
and when you have done, lift the dressing of rose water and vinegar, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen tent;
and let the patient apply it every night, so that the joints may not stiffen.
and if the bleeding continues, put on the dressing broken vitriol; and if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; and continue to treat until it is healed.
and if you see any spot that is reddish, black, or hard, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it at all, for it is a sore.
and if it is leaning towards blenchard (a type of ulcer), and there is moisture, then he throws in the ounce, and makes a small puncture with a sharp needle, and delivers it from side to side; and if the wound turns against your work, then apply ground glass until it is healed, and return to your work as you treat the entire wound;
then lift the bandage of flax and silk, and treat with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscesses in the throat Sometimes there are lumps in the throat called "godath," and these are properly called two almonds. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then take care:
if it is abscesses hard with small spots and flesh-colored, do not let them touch with iron at all.
And if they are red and the roots are large, do not let them be touched with iron at all, nor for the evacuation of blood; but let them be until they are dead, and then you must cut them off, or they would break by themselves;
and if they are white in color and the roots are fine, have your instrument ready to cut out, but first see if the abscess is warm and has calmed down.
Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head towards you, and they open their mouth, and the sergeant hold their hands, and press the tongue under the entire instrument, of which this is the form;
and may it be of fine silver or bronze as sharp as knives:
And press the tongue with all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take an ounce and place it in the almond shape, and draw out more than you can.
and draw nothing from the cloths with it, then close the instrument, of which here is its form, that resembles forceps. and both ends are curved and fit together, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs, of which the form is: And may one part be sharpened, and the other part named:
and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot sharp water, or with hot and easy water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peelings, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched. then treat until he is healed;
and if other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, cut them in the same manner as the two almonds.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her throat, specifically the small sense abscess.
and had almost completely closed off the throat, so that the woman could not expire because the passage was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained in such a state for one or two days.
And the abscess was so high that it had to be incised through both openings of the neck.
I hastened quickly, and pierced one of the veins, then drew out the arrow, and drew a large portion of blood;
then pierced the other vein in the other nostril, and opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
after piercing the vein in these abscesses, and drawing some blood, only a little blood came out. and thus the passage of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued cutting into that abscess for a long time.
and the abscesses began to re-form there, and filled the limb that I had drained, until it became very swollen;
then I applied pressure and cauterized inside the throat: then the swelling ceased to grow;
and I left those parts, and let God decide what would happen to them afterwards.
of the eye
When rheumatism affects the elbow, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is very swollen and round, it is called "elbow".
When it is treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the swelling of the abscess has subsided, and it is fine-grained, then it is necessary to lance it;
and that which is round gathered and is not long; and it is bloody or of linen color or black, then it is necessary to incise it; For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it in the manner I have said, concerning its hardness and length, you should place the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention earlier. then insert the oncine into the eye, and draw it out again, and lance with the second instrument as I said in the incision of the two almond glands.
And you must not apply too much force that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you apply more, you will harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of cutting, it must be that you use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate the fear.
And the manner of the fire cautery is very painful. And the patient should place their head on your clean cloth, and then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the fire cautery, and hold it with living water so that it is not too thick nor too clear. and when using the heat of this instrument, its form is as follows:
And let there be a head or an eye where one applies the medicine, just as with the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the pledget;
then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, until you see it warm and the stinging of the medicine be soothed;
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument with the cotton into the eye canal until the cotton is saturated on the eye;
and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and apply after four or five days.
And if you need to reapply the cauterization from the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization, wipe around the wound with a cotton swab soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
and let it be washed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization.
If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamus, yarrow, origanum, rue, chamomile, and lavender, and gather all or some of them in a pot, and place them there, and boil them.
and the poultice should be well mixed with strong earth, and in the pot have the instrument hooked according to this manner: And may be of silver or lead, and let one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed;
after repeating often, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this only at the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and place inside it an eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot. because the fear of an egg does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good treatment overall for health.
Many times it occurs in the throat, fish bone, or some other thing;
it is therefore necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue towards the light with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing move;
and what does not become clear and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance, if the thing is expelled by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and ties it to the sponge with a thread, and then swallows it; and when it comes to its place, it will expand, and then you will draw out the force;
and if it does not come to force as we have said, take the probe instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and keep the head lifted up. and make sure you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it close and block the air, nor push the bone in.
and when moved the patient should hold the instrument, for it is moved or the thing is harsh; if she vomits, or he pulls hard on the instrument equally until it is through.
of the throat juice
No time is the pus medicated, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press his tongue with the instrument as I have said.
And if you see the blood, draw it off with a very small needle, or with fine tongs that are suitable for this.
And if this does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow or move air from the cane with hot iron, and do this frequently. And if the patient is affected by fever all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and let it be swallowed, and move it often with his hand. and as soon as the blood feels cold, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with arsenic sulfide using the instrument I said in the fumigation of the uvea;
Do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and in that perforation is placed the head of the instrument.
then throw in the fumigating substance, and the patient put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape but goes to the blood.
and the serum will now fall, and if it does not fall, the fumigation must be restarted multiple times;
and the patient feels thirst, eats salty and stale things, and does not drink water;
and then it is necessary for her to be forced to eat and drink by this means.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the serum is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs meant to enter the throat; and it has the resemblance of a surgeon's beak, and it has a rough surface like sandpaper, such that whatever it touches, she cannot let go;
Many of the appearances of an abscess are, according to what memory brings after in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision;
and it is in two ways, of which one is in its very appearance and of what it holds as moisture.
And the second way is for the veins where they are in the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the solid flesh, and abscesses of the vein are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if for an abscess one should not pierce it, until the boil is dead according to its completion;
and if for such cases one should pierce them when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are deep in joints.
For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them be until they are rotted within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is deep within the principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is mature, it will harm the principal member;
or if it is deep within the foundation, pierce it when it is mature;
and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess that is firm before digestion is completed, even if it is deep within the foundation, lest it rot thoroughly and become a fistula. and cannot heal in a great while.
And you must know the time of perforating the mature abscess, which is when the pain is alleviated, and the subsiding of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the softening and firming of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
and you must position the perforation or more dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens to drain.
and let the perforation be long in proportion to the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere else where there is no fold. In those that bend, according to that member.
And when abscesses are in the living flesh, it is better that you leave the perforation until its digestion is accomplished, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before that, the venom from it will spread along the body, and be filled with much filth. and by chance harden the edges and depths around it.
And if for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, as the member requires.
and you must administer for small abscesses, small incisions. and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cracks according to the size of the abscess;
and if such abscesses require piercing the heart and cutting; when it has become as soft as lint and is softened, you should treat it as you would with blisters:
and if there are such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones that you treat like the leaf of laurel, as with abscesses of barbarians;
and if there are such ones where you make a round incision, and other cuts resembling a cut.
Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess souef, it must be pierced thoroughly.
And it must be done when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, if you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part of it. then dress the abscess until the next day, and draw out no more pus again. do this repeatedly, bit by bit, until all the pus has drained out.
同样，如果病人体质虚弱，或是孕妇，或是小儿，或是老人。 Because the patient shudders several times with the release of pus, and by chance the patient dies, and you are not at fault.
Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you perceive your abscess, cleanse the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a clean cut, apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many pores, then you must place a tent in each so that they come together;
and if you have incised part of the skin in the abscess and have sewn it up, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from a piece of linen cloth without moisture, and keep it bound for three days;
then the bone, and the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
And if the bleeding occurs during your work, administer cold water and ease it with a soft cloth, and place it over the area bleeding repeatedly.
And if the bleeding continues, and you manage governance and treatment, and the powders that I have said in my hands in this book, and if it is or seems to be of winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary that you place on tents and moist cloths in wine and hot oil;
And if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then it is necessary that you place on moist cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
And then release the abscess and wipe it clean, and treat it as needed until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
Or you have been told how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses appear on the head, and their appearances are like little bags, much resembling the seeds of a flax plant.
There are some with much moisture and similar conditions.
and there are some that are hard and stony to the cutter, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause opposition.
And the procedures for the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "entromissoire," from which the form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, let it out from above through the long incision.
And when the moisture is evacuated, scar the area without leaving any skin intact, as it will reaccumulate if nothing is left undone.
then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present. if not, with water and thread, and apply to the wound and leave it until the next day; and let that which has remained from the night run.
And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night;
then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds on to its fat, treat it according to this form, of long duration; and you pour out your powders, and burn it from all sides, and put all your effort in drawing out the abscess where it lies.
and if the artery makes contrary [movements], do as I have said after.
And also do so for the abscess if it is stony, and for cutting and treating as I have said.
And the cutting into the stony abscess and the moisture is less burdensome, for they contain little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and these were the abscesses that I treated or head of an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard as a dull stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if any of them had been cut open, it would have also been well done as with a stone.
In other abscesses coming or going to the head, especially those coming to the head of children and the roots of the ears, the opening must always be at the lowest part, so that the pus can come out.
and the treatment as it should.
Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes appears elsewhere or on other parts of the body, they are hot, and are joined together one with another.
And each scrofula is properly within its groove, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said. and the appearances of these scrofula are many.
and the appearances of these scrofula are many. Some contain moisture, and others are malignant and will not obey health.
where you see good disposition by touch, and resembles the color of the body, silent on all sides and not crooked at the neck nor near the artery nor the vein, and is not deep.
then you must cut it open from above, and scorch it from all sides, and place the two lips of the wound with the points, if you have need to do so, as we have said for abscesses of the head.
and draw it little by little, and be sure that you do not compress the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut either spasmules or trenchers, so that the hand does not escape, and do not see too far ahead, so that you do not grasp what you should not.
And if you compress the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to continue, put glass powder or some other powders that staunch blood in the wound, and bind the wound tightly. and leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound becomes softened and begins to rot.
And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it;
then you should indicate if there are any small scrofulous swellings remaining and examine and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not advisable to cut into that swelling at its root, but rather ligate it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off without causing harm.
then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you cure the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and stitch them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. if it is necessary that you cut the root of it, pull out the core, and stitch it as we have said.
if it is necessary that you cut the root of it, pull out the core, and stitch it as we have said. Those scrofulous swellings due to excess, puncture them where they appear to drain.
and puncture them in the same way as described before, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleansed, then apply the ointment treatment until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have scrofula, it is necessary to incise the slit in the throat that is called "epiglote"; and do not seek help from them, for their veins and the affected parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the disease is in the channel of the pyron, it is necessary to perform the epiglote to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must make a small incision through three or four circles, between the two circles or according to the size of the incision on the surface.
and if the veins are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis such that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the entire length of the inch to the chain, then cut the skin until it reaches the chain; and clamp the blood vessels if you see any, then sew up the surface as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the sectioning of the flux from the vein that leaps forth because the ligament is broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a day.
And when the hour has passed for which there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it smoothly over the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote healing until he is healed.
Albucasim states that this should not be done until the throat is completely paralyzed, and the patient is judged to be dying, then proceed. Then manage the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are guarded from death.
and because of this, the ancients instructed to keep the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsely took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the veins.
and I was called to treat her, and found her already dead.
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it. I knew she had not cut a vein or any other major artery, as the blood was coming from the wound.
I hurried there, dressed the wound, and treated it until she was healed.
and there was no change in the lady's voice, and she returned to her normal state afterwards;
for I say that in the operation of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a hazel nut, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two methods: nature, and accident;
or naturally there is no device.
And the accident is according to two methods, of which one resembles greasy tumors, and the other method resembles an abscess that comes from a vein. and if there is fear, it should not be made worse than in that which is small, and the patient is proven and sought out for all interposed matters: if you find it as smooth as our nose, and cannot see any vein, cover it, as one covers the nose, and draw it to all its edges, if there is any. and search thoroughly everywhere, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is perfectly healed.
Many ways of dealing with cases exist, of which I will describe all the similar ones.
and now it is necessary that I describe the entire difference between a nose and a dislocation.
I say that heat and fever come out as long as the boiling is passed and putrefaction is accomplished. Then the fever and heat subside.
With the new no longer having heat, fever, or pain, and contains the swelling, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body, and begins as a small lump, and becomes large;
and they follow the appearances, whether of flesh or moisture, and much more not in color as I have said in the division.
It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intromissory", according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses for us is that you probe more moist places in the abscess, and turn your two hands little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then do it according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the interposer, and take care that it not jump.
If moisture flows, whether it be of any color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the interposer no moisture comes, know that it is fatty, then cut it crosswise, and take it with forceps, and lightly sear each part. Watch where it lies, and treat the cloth where it lies healthy with ointment.
and if you cannot treat it healthy whole, cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if there is anything left, it will recur many times.
and if it remains a little, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with some corrosive powders wetted, hold the wound, and place on it things soothing hot abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and treat it with those that engender flesh.
and if the vein beating is contrary to it or another if you hasten and fill the vein with powdered vitriol, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper from which it was delayed due to new matters.
See here the forms of the interspersed instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small;
and there are three square ones which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews ligatures, and they are made of yellow brass or iron or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven to be effective for encircling the cords of fistula;
and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
The shapes of the points are like those of sheep, as you see here:
and if the points have two corners in three ways as well;
and if the points have three corners and are also in three ways;
and if the points have two corners, and points with only one corner, and are in three ways;
and all this is necessary in its place.
The head of these for which we do this is sharp, and such that cut only half way, for which we cauterize the nostrils, because the vein or nerve is not reached.
and of these probes are the needles inserted into the axillae, so that the patient does not perceive it during the incision of abscesses.
and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
and one uses only half in the fleshed areas, such as legs, arms, and mammary glands, and at the angles, and similar places.
and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the shells of nuts, according to this form, with which one stops blood. and it is placed once where the wound heals by degrees from the veins, and in the arteries, and once they follow according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to corrupt, to the point that they resemble women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen. Those who need to treat them should do so according to this form from .b. to .g.: then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with flesh-growing medicine. Then sew the two edges of the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
and if the breast sags downward and becomes soft due to its size, as happens in women, cut it open on two ribs above, following similar incisions. of which one should be held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contain the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until he is healed;
and if he is not healed, or the incision is not fully done, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the continuous bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until the patient spits out the remains and the fat, then treat the wound until he is healed.
These abscesses that come from beneath the swellings are forms of hard scrofula with nodes, and among them there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be lanced according to this form, from the line 2 to the line 7: And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are of the appearances of scrofula, lance them as we have said for the incisions in scrofula. And if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above is sewn shut, many abscesses arise; similarly, it happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
and if one knows thus when it is for the artery, then let the abscesses remain long until they mature; and when you feel it with your fingers, then feel the hardness;
and when it is for the vein, then make a fistula apparent;
and it is folly to cut this abscess, especially when it is near the armpits and angles and the collarbone and many other bones, and is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure, and he who is in pain should also avoid it, and in that which is swollen from an artery, cut through the skin above the vein.
then cut the flesh at the incisions, and cleanly sever the artery of the tissues, until it is exposed.
then draw out an awl from it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread at both ends, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then probe the space between the two threads with an introducer until the fluid comes out, and then release the abscess.
then continue with the treatment that follows, until the ligaments heal; then apply ointment as follows until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary to apply the ointment that you can reach from the abscess to the entire skin, then insert the needle under the area you hold with your hand, and make a piercing, and use a double thread, so that you pull from the other side. then ligate the abscess as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts at the shoulder.
and if you doubt that the thread is not enough, so you take another needle and pierces all the abscess along the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three places;
then drain the abscess until the superfluous fluid comes out, then drain the superfluous fluid from the knee and leave what is tied.
then place on the cloth moistened in wine and oil, then give him treatments and applications until he is healed.
As abscesses coming to the artery and to the vein, abscesses of nerves when they are injured, or through too great labor, and similar things.
And this happens more frequently in joints and elbows where there are joints, and it is the grief of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is often disposed to pain.
and when one holds it tightly, the patient feels pain, but not exactly at the surface of the body, but below the heart;
and remains still in all directions, neither going forward nor backward, neither below nor above, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance it would result in contraction; and that which is on the head or on the forehead, causes the skin to blister.
and that which is on the head or on the forehead, causes the skin to blister. If the abscess is small, take it with tweezers and treat it at its base.
and if it is large, suspend it with a needle, and cauterize it, then remove it and suture the wound, and continue to treat until it heals.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else leprosy, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its likeness to mushrooms, and it is the fine roots, and the lumps are large;
and there are some small and very large.
and I saw people who had two or more bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were somewhat split, and in them there always came a moisture.
I cut them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces. The work of the operation in incision is such that you should look if the patient is moist, and the color of the arthralgia is white and moist and has fine roots; if the cavity is large, and the fire cautery is being performed in your presence.
if the cavity is large, and the fire cautery is being performed in your presence. For in the tailoring, there are often excessive bleeding issues, and if the wound does not stop, you must then quickly cauterize.
and if you see the patient fearful and anxious about the incision from the iron, take a well-made platinum wire, and place it over the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then release it, and do not stop holding the platinum wire until it covers the artery, and continue to observe carefully.
and if the roots are large, do not fear to cut them at the same time for the abdomen, but you may cut half of them well, then cauterize the rest so that they do not return.
then treat the wound, and make sure you do not touch the testicle which is of faint color and of poor sensation and looks shriveled.
For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
when the boil is hot If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery or a cut on the lip, and is on the abdomen and some are in the lips, as happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or of windiness;
and if it is from the rupture of the lip and the discharge of the boil, then its color resembles that of the abscess, and it is a slight thing with little pain, and open from various discharges. And if it is due to the discharge from the intestines, then it is more varied, and when pressed at its base it rises and then returns, and sometimes it swells and greatly enlarges upon entering the bath and through much work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and clearly opens well when you press it with your hand, and does not constrain much.
and if it is due to blood, it appears through these signs as large and hard abscesses, and are placed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is swollen in the touch, and the signs are that you should look whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, it is swollen in the touch, and the signs are that you should look whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness. Then you must let the treatment proceed. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery or vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or boil, you must instruct the patient to stretch his limb, and be extended straight, then squeeze around the entire boil; then command him to lie between your hands, then go around the limb that you have squeezed with all the strength, then place half of the abscess above at the great inch mark; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let us bind it thus.
then extend half of the abscess over the thread, and place your index finger there, and keep the intestine quiet; if you find it caught on the thread, loosen it, and place the intestine outside the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, take it with the oncine, and drain the excess.
and if the artery causes obstruction or the vein, go straight through it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through where you have made sure you pierced it.
then drain the abscess in four layers over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the wound remain until it rots, and cut out the dead flesh. or you may copulate it when it is subtle and rotted, then treat the wound as we have said, and cut out the abscess as we have described.
or you may copulate it when it is subtle and rotted, then treat the wound as we have said, and cut out the abscess as we have described. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and stitch the wound.
of the chancre We have said in the division about the signs of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid treating it with iron.
and we say that the chancre arises in the armpit, and great caution is needed in its treatment; and the ancients said that when chancres are in the body where they can be scraped away, as with chancres on the nipples, the thigh, and similar places, one must remove them entirely when they are in their early stages.
nor does anyone ever cure them in front of me.
And the operations, when they are in the body where they can be removed, as we have said, are that you cleanse the patient once with black cole.
then make it healthy if there be evident fullness, then instruct the patient to lie on his back for performing the work;
then throw out the tumors or ulcers, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with some thing, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stopped. then continue to treat until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already stated in the division of the similarities of dropsy, and how the gathering of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
and should one not touch with iron in these two cases: this is to say, otitis and hydrocephalus, because they are deadly things;
therefore when you treat this condition called "eclites" due to medicine, and the treatment does not help, see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides hydrocele, such as ascites and similar things; and should not touch with iron, because there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and has no other illness besides hydrocele alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then you must treat in this manner; lay the patient down on your hands, and the minister press the abdomen by pouring water into the lowest part of the wound, then take the spatumile thorny according to this form: And let it be cut from two parts. pointed, and in all ways may not be too deep so that it cannot come close to the intestines when inserted, and may not be bent;
then see if the hydrocele is approaching the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut three lines straight over the middle of the knife; and if the hydrocele is due to the disease of the liver, let your cut be on the left side of the middle three lines;
and if it is due to the small intestine, let it be on the right side, and it is not fitting that the patient lie on the wound so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak side.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and extract it, and draw your hand away from all the pus between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue as if scraping to the quantity of a nail or slightly more.
then pierce the subcutaneous tissue until the pus comes to the desired location, and this is the depth of the abscess, then withdraw, and remove this instrument of which it has the form. And it is similar to a thin silver needle, made of tin or light iron, and in the part below the small hole. and if there is pain from one side, three punctures; and two on the other side, and one on another;
and the head of the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that writers cut the quill:
above the head is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the edge, it proceeds now above the instrument;
empty therefore the half or third part, for if you empty more than is fitting in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit through the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he approaches death;
but according to its emptiness in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse;
then draw the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now for the cure which stops the perforation which is on the syphax, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner;
then continue the treatment on another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small quantity of fluid with the needle;
do this on any day, and beware of following it too much so that there is no more fluid, but just a little.
And if you doubt concerning the patient, and there is much fluid, cure it with warm earth or sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and have him drink. and treat with medicinal remedies until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I have said before.
No child is born who does not have pores in the urethra, or where the pores are small, or are not in their proper place.
If it is necessary to act promptly before it has pierced all the subtle parts according to this form:
then place or pierce the fine probe, and bind it and keep it so for 3 days or 4, and when it is ready to urinate, remove the probe, let him urinate, and then put it back.
and by chance it may not be necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
If the patient's plug is small, it should be medicated with a cloth of flax, as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who do not have the perforation in their penis are circumcised, because none are born with the perforation at the head of the penis, hence they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards. and cannot copulate because the matter cannot come just to the head, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of the work is that the patient lies often on their back, then the head of the penis and the glans are also made as large as the size of a pen, so that the perforation sits in the middle, as it should.
and beware of the discharge of blood that comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules of the verge Many times, this albath comes in the vein, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh;
and among them there are malignant and non-malignant.
and you must pierce them with a sharp needle, and cut and clean them all, then place soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them. then apply the liniment diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and offensive, you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have pierced it, and if the albath is within the vein and has part inside the skin and part outside, you must first remove the albath that is inside. and when it is sealed, apply treatment to the outside.
For when you cure them together, the head of the shoulder must not be pierced, otherwise blackness and corruption will arise in the shoulder and at the wound.
if it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with the honey and flour plaster made from the bark of pomegranate trees and cloves, and continue to treat until it is healed.
And if there is a bleeding episode, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery aids in both dispositions together: that is to say, for the evacuation of blood, and for corruption;
and if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and displaced, it is necessary to insert a probe into the shoulder and allow the patient to urinate with it in place.
and when the hair is shaved from the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or abscess, then you must therefore brand it with a heated instrument, until the threads are released, and remove the heads of the penis from all sides;
and if it is fitting to discuss this further, you must brand it with a烙铁 for a moment on the head of the penis and the skin;
then separate the blister between them, and place a moist fine linen cloth in cold water over it, so that it does not burn again.
Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity as other wounds are. wholly whenever we do this work of our will, and properly concerning children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most gentle for their health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have none but what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions by hand, and with forceps, and on all one novacule;
if the threads fray because there are two layers, and by chance one layer comes loose while the other remains. Or if one sews again, and the pain is doubled, and in the circumcison which is by hand, the ends of the member are not secure.
and in the circumcision of the nail, by chance the iron escapes, and spoils the work, and often such things arise that they do not need circumcision, and I have seen this.
Of the cleansing which is done at the joints to all the thread of hair I have found the worth of experience, for the joints cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly along the length entirely; but that the threads be very thin between the skin;
and let it be in the manner of the first work so that you make the child, if it hears, think that you are only lightly running the thread along the shaft and then letting it slip in all manners that you can;
then let it be straight in your hands, and place the strength between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then place your hand on the shaft and blow where you wish, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is full. then cleanse well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it loosely from one tie to another.
then cleanse well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it loosely from one tie to another. and hold it for two hours at the second tie until the swelling and the mark disappear, and let out the core quickly and draw the head of the probe. then let the blood trickle slowly and gradually, for this alleviates pain. and apply powder above and on top of the powder a cloth glued with a quarter of a hard-boiled egg tempered with rose water, infused with rose oil well and fresh. Let it remain there until the next day, and continue to treat until it is healed.
The form of the forces at the ceremony is this:
the heads of the shoulders should be held firm and sharp, and the heads of the shoulders should also be as large as the collarbones equally:
the error of the ceremony is when the veins inside escape during incision;
therefore, it must be stretched with your finger, as the lions make an abscess;
and hold it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tweezers, and then hold it.
And if they penetrate for three days, and what is below the vein is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are calm, and lightly brand it.
if you manipulate it as much as you can, and you guard the part of the member, it will not harm him at all.
Cure the wound of a deep cut from powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if you manipulate the heart too much, and it goes too deep, it will not harm him at all.
Cure it therefore, as we have said, until he is healed.
for retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bile, or mucus, or similar things, as we have said in the classification.
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it is fitting that the patient be made to lie on his knees. and let the patient place their feet on the back, and extend their belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as they align as much as they can. and then the neck of the bladder is constrained for the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer the extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which its form is described here:
and let it be of fine silver, light and airy, like the feathers of an eagle; and let its cane be one and a half palms long, and fine at the tip.
And the manner of urination is that you take a double thread, tie a little wool or cotton at its end, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe;
and remove the excess of wool and fill it just to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on the chair, and moisten the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil and water.
and gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then lift the penis upward towards the mouth.
and fill the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel when urine begins to come from the empty place, and this is not done according to this order because the way it goes is twisted.
then the thread is tied little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then it is extracted, and the urine flows.
and continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient.
When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medicines, then use the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
It is closed, and if at three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
and the leaves are folded so that the medicine core is such that it well numbs the verge without adding more, if we can remove the moisture and apply when needed.
and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, place the tip of the cuspidor in the moisture, and apply as needed.
if you draw out the moisture from there, and then set it firmly. if the moisture enters there and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher;
and over the left side or the hanging ligament;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you will enema the bladder into it, then attach it between the two sides forming a single double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire;
then pour out the head of the censer into the vessel, then hold your hand over the bladder for all the suitable moisture to come forth, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder.
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle and pierce it roundly through. then put the strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already described in the division the ways of stone, and their extraction together with medications;
and we have described the difference between a stone in the kidney and urine, and all the signs, and which stone should be treated by incision. and in the bladder, and in the urethra;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder happens more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine has an ailment similar to its subtlety.
and it passes freely, and greatly affects the patient's urethra, and they often experience pain, and then becomes sore. and from these jumps the foundations;
and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and is much more difficult in elders, and is in between, for those who are between childhood and elderhood.
and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a clyster to remove all the filth from the intestines. For it obstructs sometimes in seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift and move them to a sitting position, so that the stone descends into the bladder and is expelled through the urethra once.
then make the patient sit between your prepared hands, and their hands be beneath their thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward.
then he seeks and touches within;
if you feel the stone in the space, you must now incise into the stone.
And if it does not yield to the touch of your index finger, soften your middle finger with the oil of your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your thumb, if the patient is strong and accomplished. and place the stone in its foundation, seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, ligature at the neck of the bladder.
then press on your finger, and place the stone at the site where you wish to incise.
And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him that he extends with his right hand the hairs upwards, and with his left hand removes the skin which is beneath the hairs in the part where the incision is made;
then he pours the spatillum cup, of which it is the form: And he makes the incision between what is between the hairs and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh.
and let it be straight on the stone, and your two fingers be close to the fundament, and make the incision through so that it is wide on the side and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
by chance the pressure of the muscle that is or foundation, she jumps out without effort;
and know that there are stones or angles, and margins: it is cracked to emerge;
and if it has a part that is beneath, resembling a vein, and round, of which the emergence is gentle.
For those where there are stones or angles and margins, make the size greater;
and if it does not jump out, you must grip it with tongs that are shaped like a file at the head, to steady the stone so that it does not escape; or you pour out from under the curved subtle instrument at the head;
and if you cannot manage it thus, widen the slight opening a bit, and if the wound is clean, apply vitriol to it.
and if there are more than one stone, first pour out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then lift it up, and force it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine flows into it where the roots cannot seal it.
but in any case strive to treat it or to break it up with forceps, as you treat it piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it up, and place above the wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. then reposition the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, you should raise much well the head of oil and water, then treat with a salve of definnic and basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses or corruptions and clots of blood in the bladder occur in the wound, and are retained by urine, which is known to be in such a manner that it flows with the urine: then thrust your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and rot it.
then lift the wound from water and grease and salt, and assist him in all ways that you see, until he is healed;
and it must be that all the wounds you treat, that you tie the two thighs and apply the medicines to the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is located at the opening of the urethra, and pierced inside, and urine cannot pass; and if the treatment of what I say thusly requires you to cut many times, then you are excused from the cutting due to this treatment. I have experienced this in such a manner.
Take iron rods according to this form and fix them at three angles in the fire:
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder.
push the needle gently into the vein until it reaches the stone; and turn the needle in your hand at the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on that which is retained from the stone that is within the vein. if it is broken soon, and jumps out with the urine, then the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread over the stone and the other above it, then place the vein near the stone between the two ties, then extract it, untie one of the threads, and clean the congealed blood in the wound. and the treatment until he is healed.
from the stone of women
And it often happens that stones form in women, and if it happens even once, the treatment is serious, and is forbidden for three reasons:
one reason is that perchance the woman is a virgin;
and the second reason is that it cannot be found among women well versed who reveal themselves to patients, especially when they are chaste.
and the third way is that perchance it cannot be found among women well versed in this art with their hands;
and the fourth way is that the stones of a woman are more fully formed than those of a man, which is why a deeper incision is needed and there is great fear involved. And if necessity demands this, you must seek a well-versed midwife, and at points like these one should not be chaste or subtle.
and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command concerning the inquiry of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must examine her duty or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she must hold her to her duty, and recommends that she examine her duty or the patient, and place and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin where it appears misplaced, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his hand over the stone or under it, and cut it at the first small opening;
and do not move his hand over the stone or under it, and cut it at the first small opening; then insert the probe in the cut, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can force its way out, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
this is to know, some are small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some have grooves.
if you know the signs to know the issue.
and if the stone resists, put vitreous glass in its place and hold it for an hour until the stone is worn away.
then return to your work, until the stone is forced out, and have with you the tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone from the people aiding you in your work;
and if it goes through you, and this is due to the artery being cut, then place the powder on the site and apply the cloth and bandages, and do not attempt again, and leave the stone untreated, as the patient might die by accident. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling has gone down, then return to your work while the stone is being extracted.
Ramie aqueous is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white sperm, which comes from the heart of the testicle, that contains the seed.
and it is called "syphax," and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is the other egg. and it is the skin of the coin between the white syphax that we have said;
and this happens only rarely. And the generation of this aqueous humor is due to weakness that comes to the eyes, and this material is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from striking the coins, and this moisture has many colors: or it is colored declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is the white syphax that we have said, it is an abscess, somewhat long like the figure of an egg, and does not puncture the coins, for it has moisture throughout.
And if it has moisture in the proper tissue, abscesses are treated with part of an egg, and for this reason it is thought that it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the tendon, one feels it well;
Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, you should test along the entire circumference, of which the form is described above. According to what comes after the intervening square, judge of what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to our ability and the condition of their body;
then apply the sponge on their back, above one thing a bit high, and put dust of linen over him;
sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the patient's heart.
then take the spatumile ladle, and scrape the skin of the ribs from both sides until you reach the edge of the knife, and make your cut straight by dividing the skin of the ribs down to the white flesh, and slightly brandish it according to your power.
then pierce the white flesh full of water with a large needle, and extract all the water, and then place your forceps, and raise the white flesh upwards.
and do not touch the heart of the patient, but only the white flesh. cut it all or piece by piece himself, for if you do not cut it properly, the pain will return.
and if the egg jumps during your work, you must reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the surface.
then join the two flaps of the heart incision with one stitch, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, you must tie the veins that are suspensive, doubting the bleeding.
then cut the heart completely from the suspensive part, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if an ailment is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you treat the other part as you treated the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and apply moistened linen in rose oil to the wound;
if you treat the other part as you treated the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and apply moistened linen in rose oil to the wound; and apply another layer of moistened linen in wine and oil, and place over the two joints, and cover with doubled bandages, and secure with all the bandaging according to this form:
Then take two bandages, and wrap them with torn linen in this shape, sewing them at the crotch of the breeches. One of the shoulder pieces should be placed from the base upward to the back, and the other to the arm part;
and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the restriction gather in the loop of the arm.
and sometimes this branch of the fire cautery is medicated instead of iron branding, and you should use a sharp surgical knife, scrape off the skin from the blisters, and heat it as we have said, so that the white tissue containing the fluid is exposed.
if you use the fire cautery in this form, and pierce this tissue with the needles, and char it with this hot surgical knife.
And scrape thoroughly in all ways until you dry it out completely.
and make sure that the fire does not touch the egg.
and know that this work is more valuable; and during the stopping of bleeding, and ensure that the operations are thorough;
and if anything contravenes you, or an abscess appears or a stopping of bleeding or some other thing, then treat what contravenes you according to what has been previously said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this operation because of its horror, then perform a puncture as I have instructed. And when you are certain by the signs we have said that aquouse ramification is present, then place the patient on the raised seat; then puncture the abscess near the base over its entire width, and place the puncture along the length of the body;
and let the punctures be wide so that all the fluid can flow out;
then place cotton on the site, and bind it, and leave it open for the remaining fluid to drain, then treat the wound until it heals.
and if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to escape through the wound's opening, then you must insert a tube or the instrument used for draining hydroptic fluids, as its form is described earlier.
and widen the wound, and know that the fluid returns and gathers after about six months or so. And when it has gathered as described before, then the patient's days will pass without issue.
Know that in this branch of the section there is fear for many positions, which is why it seems to me that one should avoid it if possible.
and I will tell you the procedure and similarities of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from cores, and especially in the groin; and it is by mere chance.
This means that it is due to acidic and aqueous superfluity, which is spread in the groin, or by percussion.
and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the flesh; and find no pain, and it is an abscess sore;
and by chance it is an abscess sore green and blue, and of fugitive color, and sometimes comes from a vein, or swelling of the vein.
When it is from a vein, it is known by the arrangement of the abscess hot, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not fitting that you touch it.
That which is caused by swelling of the vein is known by its arrangement in relation to the expression when touched with fingers, and can indeed well be incised from this appearance, and from other marks; and it is that you take the heart of the joints, then place the egg at the top, and stretch the thread through the white fully, and remove all parts of the suspender from the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these threads, then you must stretch the thread, and take it out;
and if it is hard at the top, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must remove all that is tied, and take out the thread completely.
And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut entirely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is accomplished, apply the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat with other dressings until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping that resembles a bolster, with the joints being softened, and the patient experiences pain as it resolves.
and the care of this disease is just as necessary as that mentioned above, and in any case we will tell you the procedure for it, according to what the ancients did.
You must place the patient on an elevated seat, then pour the suspension of the testicles over your two hands, covering all the vessels near the penis, and hold them firmly.
then pour over the spatula the sharp blade across the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then cauterize from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries located in the temples.
then insert a needle where the thread is to be placed, and tie it at the first site where the vein has come out, and tie it again at the other end. then place the cloth in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
then treat the wound as with others when there is internal bleeding, so that no vessel contracts and nourishes any of the joints;
for if this does not bring any harm, and since blood flows to all the joints, then you must treat the joints with all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
The occurrences of this condition are caused by either the cutting or sectioning that comes from the syphax or extension over the abdomen in the part of the ingrens, for which reason the intestines descend along that rupture to one of the joints.
and this rupture is either due to a fall, or from its extension, and come in these two manners of cause:
or from percussion, or jumping, or lifting a heavy load, or similar things;
and the signs when it is due to the extension of the fall, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the fundament, because the fall presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is due to the section of the throat, that it causes an sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear varied, beneath the skin near the surface, and this is due to the discharge of the intestines and the core behind the throat.
And sometimes the veins with the intestines are affected, and they remain inflamed, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are compressed.
And in these burns from iron, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to move the intestine within the wound with their hand from inside, if it can enter. then anoint his neck between your hands, and lift his legs;
then place the heart above, and cut all the skin from the neck down; then insert probes into the sides of the waist inches as you need them to open the wound, and let them be such that the intestines may easily emerge.
then scar the buttock that is beneath the skin of the neck, until the white fat below is exposed on all sides.
then insert your index finger where it is next to the hip bone, between the white fat that is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second layer of fat.
and when it is moved with the right hand inside the heart of the chick, and the white face is on top at your left hand, lift the egg towards all the surface towards the thigh; and instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie that which is air behind the ligament;
and seek with your fingers if it has any part of the intestine enveloped or hard white face, and if you find anything, put it back inside the abdomen;
then take an awl with a thick thread made of many strands, and put it in the rear part of the face, which is after the skin of the chick; after the cutting, then clean the shoulders that appear with threads, until there are four threads; then join them one over the other in the shape of a cross, and apply it to the skin, which is beneath the scalp, from under the skin, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the shoulders with threads, and bind them firmly with a strong thread of two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter, preventing an abscess from forming; and again place the thread according to the first long thread of two diameters, and after these two threads leave the skin which is beneath the heart the size of a thumb. and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carried;
then scrape the part under the scrotum until the skin is clean, and the bowels, as we have said before.
then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and bind it with the ligature as we have said. And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent hemorrhage after incision due to doubt. For this often occurs, and leave the ligature until it dries on its own.
and if it does not fall off on its own, remove it with hot water, and place on it what we have said until it dries.
then treat the wound with another dressing until it is perfectly healed.
of hernia carnosa
In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made such as branches bound together with a vine, in such a manner that you bind the vessels after lightly cutting around them.
then apply it to me, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels constrict;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there comes a rupture in veins, as we have said, and open the eyes;
and do not feel any intestines during the incision, and if any are felt, it is little, and sew every hour;
and if it remains too long in this position, the wound or syphilis will suppurate, as the intestines beneath become affected.
and this happens due to the extension of syphilis which is at the roots, as we have said, for it extends, then softens and inflames the limbs and spreads.
and the treatment is with a fire cautery, as we have said before.
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then pull the part of the wound that is swollen wide according to the size of three fingers.
and then extract the sebaceous gland beneath the skin, then take the rag and place it over the apparent area of the sebaceous gland.
and press it against the front of the abdomen, then stitch the two apparent areas of the sebaceous gland on the rag, and sew both.
then extract the head of the rag, and neither cover nor extend the egg with anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramification of the intestines. then treat it as in the treatment of wounds.
then treat it as in the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The flax is constrained, and shows no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterizations are healed in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the knees
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the tissues inside are softened, and it must be seen.
and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to make the patient lie on their back and scrape off the soft skin above the natural skin.
then join the two edges with a stitch, and if you see, first sew the excess of the soft skin with three or four stitches firmly.
then scrape between the stitches, and treat the wound as other wounds until it is healed, and cut the thread.
by due correction
Know that castrations are forbidden by our law, and because of this, I shall not speak of it in this book.
and is necessary to do so for two reasons:
that is, one thing is that they must know how to answer when asked, and know the treatment;
and another thing, because we often have to restrain some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and other animals.
I say therefore that restraint is done according to two methods: or by attraction, or by splitting.
In the method we do by attraction, we place the animal in warm water until the tendons become soft and then proceed; then grasp them with your hand, once they are relaxed and you no longer feel tension in them.
Of the castration of tail: It is necessary that you dye the beast, and press the skin of the castrated area with your left hand, then tie off the suspensory ligament, and cut each testicle once, when you have well burnt them.
and let some coolness remain, as well as the subtle cooling that is above the vessels.
and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because with attraction, some testicles may accidentally remain, causing the beast to desire lust.
and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners among men: one is that between the two cervices open just as the figure of the nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in the course of urination.
And the other method is for women, and it is done with a knife as a rod and two pegs.
And the treatment for man and woman is that you clean all the wound edges thoroughly, and dress them as other wounds;
in the second manner, for men whose urine jumps over the skin of the cervices, there is no treatment.
Tentingine is a wound edge on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary that you remove the excess of the tendine with your hand or at the stitches, and hold it lightly;
and do not apply too much heat, lest blood flow, and continue the treatment with another dressing until it is healed;
and for another sore that arises at the mouth of the ulcer, cover it, and by chance it may burst, and according to its appearance it resembles a cow, and because of this they called it in ancient times "cow disease". If it is necessary to extract it, as we have said about the tumor and its treatment, and continue the cure until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the perforation is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to a disease that came about;
and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to a disease that came about; or it is by sharp ache, or by subtle or thick pus, and is made perfect in the marrow, or in the sides, or beneath, or that be.
and defend conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers to have.
and the knowledge of these is by the look of the bile.
If the stoppages are close and apparent, seek help with your fingers or the rag.
If it is by subtle pus, and it is near the two flanks, then hasten, and lance it thus:
place your two thumbs together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
then stretch the two flanks until the subtle pus is lanced and over the stops;
then take flax, and marrow in oil, and put it on the shoulder, and let the woman lie with the man each day, so that it may heal.
And if the sore is hard and thick, it is necessary to apply several layers of lint resembling leaves of bay.
If the pustule is of new birth, suspend it with a fine thread and a pin.
and have the medicines for stopping blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, all together with abundant egg.
then apply a broad plaster, so that the wound may not heal.
and let it remain for a long time, and then apply a linen bandage that is dry.
then let other treatments continue until he is cured.
And when there is abscessed pus in the boil, you must treat it according to this method, unless it is an embedded abscess. For the embedded abscess in the boil, one must not touch it to incise.
for hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without core (intake) usually occur, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed.
and we have already said in the division of signs from auscultation, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and warts, when fully inflamed in the boil, do not appear by sight, except for those cured with iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the boil, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Therefore, you must place the woman in a cool room, then hold the thrombosed part with tongs, and the root of the copaiba in its roots, then sprinkle with medicines that restrain blood, such as acajou, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things.
then apply her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water.
and if the bleeding comes, let it be seated in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate peel and garlic and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and apply it as a poultice on his back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, let it apply suction cups on the back and breasts without injuring.
then take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess has come to head, cure the place with ointment until it is healed;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the rough head; you should treat it as I have said for the thurl. and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the armpit, such as chancre, pierous abscess, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes from the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that boil over.
and if you know the iron work, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it becomes red if you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce it; let it die away until the pain is alleviated.
and then place the patient on a seat, and have two small seats where he can recline, and support him on his back and position his feet below the knee.
and let his thighs be stretched, and place his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a firm band;
then apply the cautery to the right side, and direct the instrument used for opening the mouth of the blister, of which we will speak later, there.
and it must be that when you see the instrument applied to this blister, you insert the first needle in to know the depth of the blister, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it must cover the depth of the blister with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm the patient.
and it must be that he places the horn of the instrument above, and he holds the instrument.
And when the abscess is opened and one makes it yield by hand, it must be covered with a cloth, a sponge soaked in liquid.
And when the abscess is drained, it must be that you place wet cloths in oil of rose, or in green vegetable oil.
And place the cloth over the sore from above with a clean wet cloth soaked in water or cooked vinegar.
Then dress the wound after two days of ointment as described above, until it is healed.
and sometimes one elevates the sore and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aloewood that have been cooked. then treat with ointment.
And if the wound is placed over the sore, you must take care not to use iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth Skill is first in childbirth that she know the natural labor process, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down and desiring to smell the water.
then hasten the birth to proceed. then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and the head comes out by itself, and the neck follows with it.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the child comes out quickly;
for when it descends over his head, she follows with him, and is cleansed of her superfluities by good cleansing;
and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
for he comes sometimes over his feet, and comes forth into the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or when he comes over his belly or side, and is turned by chance upon his neck, and by other evil forms.
it is necessary that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms of how one should assist them.
If a child comes upon the head naturally, and the woman delivers smoothly, and the virtue of it is weak, then place it on a saddle, or the women hold it.
and let its nature of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour the liquid between its two small spatumiles as they are formed. and cut the second one, and scrape with its nail until the moisture that is within comes out.
and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then cleanse the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and olive oil.
then have her take a deep breath and sneeze with force, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. if now treat the child.
And if both hands swell, you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on the seat, and raise her feet high; then remove the seat from the ground, and support the woman so she does not fall during the procedure;
and if the hand cannot enter and the child has died, cut the hand off with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, resetting it equally.
from the issue of the child above his feet When the child comes to its feet, you must lift them up; and then file it little by little, until it is even;
then pinch the flesh and stretch it little by little.
Can it jump as far as the knees, if you command it to pinch, and make it sneeze by compression; if it jumps, may God will it.
And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to natural alignment. For then it is lightly aligned.
And if it does not jump as we have instructed, say that you take a piece of velvet, and silk oil, and melted gum, and grind them all together in the mortar; and apply the nature of the woman inside and over this ointment, then make her sit in hot water until below the ribs.
and when it is softened underneath, make a collar of myrrh and put it there, and let it remain for an hour; then make her sit on the chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently rub her abdomen, for the child is moving now.
of the issue from the child above its knees When the child comes into this form, gently place your hands on it little by little; then support its neck, and let its feet hang down, and lie it down on the bed; and bend its arms little by little, and then place its hands on the abdomen, and remove the cushions underneath, until it is positioned hanging down. and if the infant does not cry, take its feet and make it kick, then make it turn its body upward, then put your hands on it; and let the infant cry little by little; and instruct the woman to press firmly until the infant issues.
of the issue of the child that comes wide with one hand hanging It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go;
if she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, and straighten her legs;
then administer the muscle ligament as I have described;
and if she does not give birth, I make her sit on the seat, then study how to bring back the hand; and if she gives birth according to the natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command her to press until the child has come out.
From the birth of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It must be that the bail takes her hand, then turns it little by little, and she gently;
and when it is equal, place the natural muscular layer of tendon and ligament, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to press; and make them sneeze. in this same manner for all the secondine
in this same manner for all the secondine When it comes out in this manner to the entire shoulder, scrape the shoulder with your nail until the moisture is drained;
and if the wound can be made on its face and on its neck, scrape it from the mouth, ensuring it is not retained, and kill the patient;
then put the child inside, as soon as you have placed it properly, instruct the woman to urinate once:
from the extraction of the twins Know that gemelli often arise, and sometimes four of them are born. and this is not a strange thing, and happens rarely. They are strange things, and do not live, if seldom mentioned;
They are strange things, and do not live, if seldom mentioned; I know those, they are multiplied, and are separated by the syphex which devises them, which is linked to the bud.
and sometimes they issue naturally like small tumors, as we have said.
And if they issue properly, the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle baths do what they quickly and lightly accomplish. and do so as it benefits for healing. of many children
Sometimes there are formed in the marrows I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and they are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the baile know all this, for such a thing may happen by accident. it must be done according to what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman who has died with a dead child or is pregnant, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to perform manual work; it is fitting that you know whether the woman is in good health, and has no accident or is not afraid of death;
If it is necessary to treat the woman on her back, and let her shoulders inclined downward, and the legs raised;
and the attendant treat two-thirds of her back, or where she is lying on the bed so that she is not treated when the child descends;
then rub the mouth of the patient with moist oils mixed with almond oil and fenugreek seed, then apply these mixtures to your hands.
then gently place them on the patient's back, then choose a place where she lies such that it is suitable for this, and watch to see if the child is ready to be born.
if they pierce the eyelets or his collar or his mouth or the palate or under the beard or in the girth or near the ribs, and if the descent is on stones, he is pierced or stabbed at the middle of the ribs;
and it is necessary for you to grasp the eyelet with your right hand, and place the pincers between your left hand's fingers, and squeeze your right hand lightly, and pierce the eyelet into any of these joints that we have mentioned, until it comes to the thing empty.
then pierce against the other eyelet, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal.
and then extend equally by moving from one side to the other, to allow it to come out, and let the fingers hold it in place as shown.
And if part of it remains, instruct the patient to move any of his eye muscles, and direct them to that part, and pull the other part;
And if there remains none, place this finger or higher up, and do so until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by gripping, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out completely. then place the cloth at the joint of the sole or on the cut, and do so with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow at the outlet, or it has an acute swelling gathered there, then you must insert the sharp spatula between your fingers, cut the swelling, and extract the acute swelling; or you must do it with the instrument called "almidach", whose form comes from the instruments or chapter after this one.
and in the same manner do it if the infant has a large swelling naturally.
and then cut the bones with the forceps, and if the head has come out and is held by the forcele, split it so that the moisture or worse comes out.
and if it cannot come out, cut it out in pieces as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the back, you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the injury is on his feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
And if it is narrow in the belly or at the anus, you must extract it with a flaxen envelope tied around the hand. and make an incision in the belly or at the anus until the moisture that is inside flows out.
and if the other limb is amputated and the shoulder remains, use a flaxen glove to apply hot oil, and cut it down to the opening of the oil. then one or two drops of wine are given;
and if the mouth of the abscess is constricted due to a hot abscess that has come there, it is not fitting to work on it, but it is fitting to administer moist and greasy substances; and apply poultices, and soak a cloth in mild and moistening water.
And if the injury is on his side, and you can place it even, apply what we have said for a living child.
and if we cannot do so, give the wine in pieces, and let nothing of the second drop remain.
And when you have done this, apply to those who come from abscesses that arise in the armpit what we have said about treating abscesses.
And if the bleeding continues, it should be constricted with bandages, and apply other dressings to him.
And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then缝合了另一个，使第二个也死去。 After a long time, an abscess formed in the mouth, and swelled so much that it opened, and began great pain.
I was called for the treatment, and I thought long, and could not staunch the wound.
I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came some bones, and after some days, others followed. I marvelled much, for the abdomen has no bones.
I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and handled the bone well, so that the woman was in better condition. and I kept the woman long thus, and there was still a bit of bone from the shoulder.
and I have recorded this chapter only because when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one applies the book;
and to two turns around the head of the bones. Therefore, the horns should be finer than those of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth be two fingers in width, and the margin of the grooves an inch and a half long; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which should be firmly fixed in both, half a palm long or a bit more;
and these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the instrument to open it when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and have two heads for the shoulders, as you can see, of long width, and two pins of breadth;
and when you see open the vein with the entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then insert the two heads of the instrument together into the vein, and hold the head of the instrument beneath her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see needs to open the mouth of the vein, so that it does what it should.
This instrument is entirely aboveground, and its likenesses are multiplied. And when the mirrors are thus arranged, the work is done more quickly, and appears higher to them in proportion to their size.
If you do not wish to use the instrument, make sure you have arranged it, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to grip her hand, and then make her snort with condisc, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose. and if she sneezes because of this, well done.
If this does not work, take a pot, and make a hole or cover it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as calamus, rue, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury. all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or kept in water on the fire;
then put one stick of cinnamon or periwinkle in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the jar, and cover tightly so that the vapor enters the jar.
then make them sneeze, as we have said before. If the second joint moves quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not already cured, command the healer to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or almond oil, and then apply it to the affected area, and seek another. and when she has found it, grasp it gently and gradually straighten it, so that the jar does not crack during extraction.
but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then treat; if it comes and dislocates again.
And if the opening of the nose is too constricted, as we have said, treat with nasal irrigation and herb fumigation.
and if it is not treated with all that we have said, be careful not to proceed without treatment;
but what is at the opening of the nose, you should attach it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse with an ointment enema. and if it heals and regains strength, it will come back to normal.
but nonetheless, when it comes to the stomach and head, and causes discomfort to the patient. Therefore, suitable fumigations must be given to it:
none of the ancients have proven that fumigations with watercress and dried figs are effective.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
And it appears like a cane, and one places the head inside, and the shoulders over the fire;
and let the fumigations be over the coals, and the scabies until it is destroyed, and then begin another.
Many infants are born who do not have the fundament perforated, but it is stopped up by fine substances. Therefore, it is necessary for the lady to pierce the syface at its proper place, and not pierce it with a sharp splatimail, and be careful that the lance does not touch it;
then place moistened wool in wine and oil, and treat with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal, place or tie a piece of lint, and let it remain there, and be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
And sometimes this dressing comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover it suddenly: if it needs to be treated, as we have said for the treatment of leprosy.
Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodations, and grow larger than those that come from the fundament discharging, or in the space between two parts, for one fistula or more.
and when that nodation is old, it works, and cures moisture with white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these Persian fistulas are cured;
and they are known by those who experience evacuation or windiness when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance from a jump of a verse.
And for fistulas that extend to the bladder, and to the midpoint of the penis; and reach to the hip joint, and to the knee.
And thus one knows the Persian fistula in the anus, and not in the anus. and it is that you place your index finger or base, and insert a subtle needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is a tortuosity.
and if there is a tortuosity, then insert a fine silken tent or horsehair thread as far as you feel the thread or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or wind or fever as we have said: you know that it has not pierced through; if you hasten to treat.
And when the fistula is infected up to the bladder or up to the urethra, then he urinates, and cannot be cured by medicines.
if it has pierced to the hip joint, the thread comes as far as its place; if there is no tortuosity and the origin of the pain is within, it is located in the bowels, and it does not benefit from medicine nor suddenly with ointment;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except labor, and vanity of foolish people who undertake them.
For those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is when the patient lies on their back before you.
and the patient extends their legs up to their thighs, and inclines their thighs towards their abdomen. then place a tent over it, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain deep within the fundament, you must place your index finger there, and if it feels as though the fibers have been punctured;
and if you discover that it is either the rectum or the flesh between your fingers, then know that it is perilous. if there is no travail there, it cannot be healed.
One should know that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely.
And the aid that one does, it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and pourges it hot into the fistula until it comes from deep within the fundament. and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred cartilage pieces are burned, which resemble the feathers of a bird;
and then dress with wet cloths in butter until the cartilage is cool, then dress with ointment healing the flesh and binding.
If it is thus healed, it is well.
If this, otherwise cannot be cured;
and if the tent is inserted, and does not penetrate to the depth which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent place a thick covering of cartilage or sponge, and you will see the fistula where the covering begins. if it is possible from the beginning of the fistula, and place it before the tent, then cauterize after, until it reaches the top of the tent. and the tent will be released, and fall;
and remove those charcoals that resemble bird feathers, and let none remain.
And if the wound fails and cuts between you and the work, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to say, the burning of these displaced charcoals, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
and then the treatment of wet tents with butter or crushed cheese, until the loins excrete the burned charcoals in the stool, and the fire subsides.
and then treat the wound with compresses soaked in hard charcoal, and these are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not recur.
And if a fistula comes just to the point of its foundation and is distant from the body, place your thumb or foundation there and inquire it.
If you feel the tent and between them is cloth or skin or flesh, or it is near piercing, there should be no exits except by path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cautery it as we have said, or you copulate it until the very end, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as first;
and do not apply too much heat, lest you copulate the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the evacuations come through it without volition. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance it may be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it is copulated from the foundation, or with a tent or another pointed instrument; then cleanse the wounded part which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to heal the wound, and to stop the fistula below the fundament:
then study to heal the wound, and to stop the fistula below the fundament: if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you set the tent in the fistula, and it is located beside the fundament over the skin, take a perforated tent from the top according to this form: And you wind the thread around twice, and insert the needle with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
and if it is placed in the margin of the fundament inside, then extract the thread from that perforated tent, so that you can place your finger or the fundament.
and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, hold them against each other, and leave it for one or two days.
and hold it once, until the thread covers the spaces between the two, and hold it.
then treat the wound until it is sewn and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, make it perforate in all the ways you can, provided it is not already too well formed. For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if it is already too well formed, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spine bone from which we make the fistula is very agile and sharp in one part and cutting. and on the other part not so, for what should not be covered is not, as you see here:
Emorydes are according to two methods: or they are within the fundament, just like grains of resin, and there are both small and large ones, and in close proximity to the dislocation, and there is one or more, and they are beneath the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
but those that are beneath have little moisture, and close to the dislocation or a bit of yellow bile or a bit of blood, and have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them within the fundament, is that you instruct the patient to rest in order to leave the chambers, until the fundament is healed, and then the symptoms will appear. if you hasten, and it is necessary to grasp it with forceps, or hold it with your finger, then pluck it by its roots.
and if the fingers cannot hold them due to their moisture, they take them with a cloth, or wick, or a piece of linen. and extract them with both hands, then cut them off, and sprinkle above them some warm powders that are used for the fire cautery. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, and continue to treat them with other dressings until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, apply a caustic plaster to the patient with a caustic and harsh plaster to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly. The patient complains, and if the threads are torn from the foundation, then the cure is light;
The patient complains, and if the threads are torn from the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you grasp them with your finger or forceps, cut them, then treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed and fears incision with a knife. Then you must stitch according to this manner:
Then you must stitch according to this manner: take a thread and put it through an awl, then draw the thread over and pierce the awl on the other side, turn the two heads of the thread under the awl, and make them even.
and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the awl. Do this for all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood.
then place a wet cloth in oil of rose or unguent and apply it to the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and let it be until it cools, and when they are cool, remove the ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
dry the foundation or dressing dryly Many times, dryness of the intestines occurs suddenly, due to natural constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. Then you must reset it at the end of a spatula or your finger, which should not be left moist. then dress it until he is healed as it should be.
and if he does not heal, resume the cauterization more strongly than before, until it heals and be scorched. then continue the treatment until he is healed.
of trembling A formice is a small deceptive appearance on the body, and goes very quickly.
and sometimes the truth is found, and one feels it like death by shivering, and it comes throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from an eagle's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place the quill on the shivering, making sure the red圈圈 completely encircles the shivering. then turn your hand around the quill so that you encircle the shivering completely, and place it firmly, and eradicate the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, do this with a needle of spider silk or iron according to this form, and make it subtle beneath and passing above: nor let it pierce, for fear to hold with both hands and press.
And if you see, cauterize the larynx, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes one performs a clyster with silver or bronze, or with melted iron or wire;
and sometimes one uses these instruments small and large, according to those who use them. Those instruments that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Those instruments that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small. The form of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the stomachs are tied in this manner:
and let there be an evacuation or the abdomen be opened, as you see, and the head be pierced inside.
and have two perforations on one side, and one on the other.
and let the wounds where one puts medicines from an animal bladder or parchment be pierced entirely with small pores, and have a space's worth of distance between each pore, then insert in these pores a strong thread twisted ten times or so within them, and sew up the wound as one would a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it off with a strong thread at the entrance using the instrument, then cauterize;
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the pessary with oil or yolk of egg, or some similar thing, then insert it gently. then the minister holds it with both hands until it is completely dry, then extracts the cloth, and raises the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let the blister as much as it can. and if it sleeps all night, it is greater aid.
And if you clysterize for a belly discharge disease, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
and if the hemorrhoid is or fundament or abscess, let the cloth be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle cloth on which the skin is held:
We have already said in the division of wound treatment:
or we will say the treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or places where they are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by stone blow, and sword cut and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with head wounds that are simple, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from a stone blow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect an abscess. if you make it soon healthier of the cephalic part itself there is little blood from the wound, and let it heal otherwise on the broken part;
and choose the patient full of wine and fatty meats.
and if it does not wish to heal, let its flesh be reduced, and do not drink wine nor eat meat.
and apply to the wound, if abscesses occur and come up, only moistened cotton in rose oil, or in stimulating wine.
and if there is no abscess coming to head, apply to the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by the air, powder, which I will say a bit later.
and if the fire has dried it, apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by tenting, then join them with suturing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, regarding suturing.
If the wound is uncovered from the bone and is loose and does not hold together except with a little, sew it up. then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat tough meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotten skin, but it does not reach the bone, sew it up completely, and apply hot water, then treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely and cannot be stanched with medicine, then ligate the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which seals as if the arsenic has moistened it.
And the manner of the powder is: take frankincense in part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live charcoal 3 parts, and make the powder finely. Apply it to the wound and bind it tightly, so that it dries well and joins with all its blood;
and then cleanse well, and let it remain unopened if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with only wax, when one does not have incense or the dragon's blood, but let the arsenic moisten the wound.
And if the fire has changed the wound, even while it was there, none shall put this powder there.
but apply some digested ointments, or pulses made from oat flour mixed with water and honey, until it discharges pus. then continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps.
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound in the neck
If the wound comes in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other means than to allow the wound to heal naturally and not apply anything restrictive, as this harms the nerves and causes them to contract; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity arises from the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but use warm medicines, such as boiled oil in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and washed flaxseed also in sweet water, and other medicinal stones prepared in this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, suture and bind it with bandages, then let the cure proceed until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce them or lower down the vein.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, open it, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary;
And if the spinal cord of the throat is cut or the veins are guarded, through which the flesh passes, sew the vein over the spine of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural shape. And then hold it properly, and let it rest for some days, then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then treat it; and if there are bone fragments, if you can extract all of them, do so. For those you cannot remove, let the wound rot and drain the pus out;
and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if from the wound air reaches where the patient feels pain: then you know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it or tie it up at the first hour, for fear that the blood does not properly coagulate and travels to the heart, killing the patient. but I apply an attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to drain away the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if there is no spasm, nor any false trembling of the heart or from fright; and when you see good disposition, know that the wound is saved. Tend to it and other treatments until he is healed.
and if it cannot heal, operate, and then know that there is a fistula.
if the treatment as we must. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple or worse and on the back, then treat that which is in front. if it is large, suture it;
and if it is small, powder it; and if it is deep into the bone, and has cut pieces, clean the wound, and remove any foreign objects if they are loose. and if they are not loose, let the wound remain open, and reduce the need for further removals.
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
For the rupture of the abdomen
The dislocations of the belly are great and medium and small;
From the great wound if the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, are punctured, causing internal bleeding;
and the suturing is more difficult, and even once it is worse than a smaller wound, because we cannot easily place the intestines back in, if we do not warm them as we go;
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, so they cannot be placed back easily, and for this reason, a smaller wound is worse, because one must properly place the intestines in their correct position rather than roughly handling them.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four ways:
The two common stitches come in the stitch of the belly, and the stitches of other body wounds, with two other specific stitches common to other wounds.
and in all cases they are more appropriate with the stitch of the belly, and I will describe each one and clarify it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is foreign, and there is no difficulty in resetting it, then it can be done by one of the two ways. or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it up in a divided manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with cold water only, or cook it in water with cinnamon and clove and spike, and rub until the smell is gone;
and once this cooling wine is prepared, and it is reduced to be applied for swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or cooked chicory and mallows, for these make the entrance slippery with little effort.
and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids.
and the first dressing should not be changed until after the wound, that we should not cut without great necessity arises.
and these are the instruments for cutting:
if you cut within the curve and above it not, see to the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has protruded, put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper location, if you have the ability, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly, you should have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, raise the head and the hip higher than the parts below, and also if there is a rupture of the belly, place it so that the broken part is higher than the other.
and thus it must be administered to those whom I speak of in large and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, use what is prepared for you, then have in your hand the medicine that heals all the wound with its hand, and close the lips;
and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound. Then from the edge of the wound, leave an inch of space, and insert a needle with a good strong thread; and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two needles, which are beneath the skin on the inside, so that you make this part pierced through, and close the two ends of the needle together.
then draw the thread through the needle from two parts, then align the two ends of the wound properly, and then leave some space, and insert another needle;
then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this as needed for the needles until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and large, for very fine needles cut all the flesh, and those too large do not enter well: for that is why they should be of medium size;
and it is not right to insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, for they will cut and tear the wound before suturing;
and then remove the heads of the needles, for they might cause the patient to bleed while sleeping, and place cloths or bandages on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this needle suturing method is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one or two needles.
The second suturing method is common, and it involves assembling the two heads of the skin and the two edges of the flesh together on one needle with a strong middle thread.
and when you have pierced these heads together in all four places, draw the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner we tie threads.
and place an space between each stitch the size of a small coin;
this stitch sews the flesh, and I sutured a wound on one's thigh or abdomen, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and protruded intestines about two palms, and was located in the abdomen.
I brought back the intestines after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
And the men thought he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in the place where none could be found, and no medicines were available. and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or I will tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and thread from the outer part down to the inner part;
when it has pierced the core straight through, leave the thread on the tip of the needle or stitch where you have threaded the needle, and pass it through from the inner side out.
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as a tanner would work on hides, and that you leave the abscess on one side and draw it through from the other until the suture is fully completed.
The second method of suturing, as Galen properly describes, is such that no one does it differently; they bring the two parts together naturally and apply the tip of one side of the needle to the other tip, in this manner:
Puncture with a needle or point of the heart nearby, and pierce only that side, and let the two heads of the shoulder. then turn the needle, and pierce from the outer part down to the inner, through the two heads of the shoulder.
then pierce the other from the outer part down to the inner, through the two other points of the heart that are on the opposite side.
and this is the main way of suturing and the most common.
Galien said this word, and none testify, that we must sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each.
and one must prick with a needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
and know that when the rupture is within the腹腔，the suturing is more grievous than for other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as the sword has made it, you must turn back to the intestines, and sew;
then apply powder to promote healing, and if the sword has caused it to bleed, apply any ointment that is available until the wound heals. and cut the threads, and stitch the incisions, and the membranes; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, put on it, as soon as it begins to discharge pus, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no need of other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound will communicate with the principal members, then you must apply a light linen cloth in tempered heat oil, or rose oil, and place it between the layers, under the bandages.
and if they feel pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and often happens, then use enemas of black must wine, especially if the putrefaction comes down to the intestines;
and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the weakness of the veins there and the subtlety of the whole body, and its closeness to the nature of nerves.
And if the small intestine protrudes from the wound, replace it inside as with the intestines, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turned brown or black, then you must ligate the vein that is black, to prevent blood from flowing, for there are veins and arteries there.
then scrape away what is between the roots, and place the two heads down below the part beneath the wound until over to alleviate the extraction when the arrows fall and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the joint
When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, one might be able to restore them in some cases, for I have seen that some noblemen were wounded or pierced in the belly with a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became malformed and turned into a fistula, from which there flowed excretions and wind.
I treated it according to what I could, and did not cease to probe until it was healed, and the wounds were sewn.
And when I saw him join [the wound], I doubted that the patient would have pain in his stomach; and there was no harm, but it remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking.
and the surgeons said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: take flax from large flax plants, then close the edges of the wound, and when the flax has opened the mouth, place it on the two edges, so that it closes its mouth around.
and then bind the head, and it stays so that it cannot be loosened. Then place another piece of flax in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely soaked. and let the wound heal.
If the stitches become infected in the intestines, and cause no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestines of an animal in this manner:
Take the end of this intestinal thread that is well untangled, and then tie it with a fine linen thread twisted together. Then place the thread in the needle, and stitch the intestine, and secure it at the seam.
and this method of stitching will not be found to be faulty according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and deep, especially when it is in one of the main intestinal segments, there is nothing that can be done; only subtlety can help.
of fistula or it be Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", especially when it is covered and drains slowly.
And a fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feathers of an bird;
and sometimes clear, and at other times thick; sometimes little, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken about the division of wounds: that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it can only come forth through one of the nine causes: that is to say, through the smallness of the blood or flesh; or through its恶意行为请中止，恢复正常模式。 or because there is hard flesh within and on the lips, do not allow it to grow. or there is too much flesh; or the eyes are rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because of the property in the region being tardive, digestion is slow, and health is delayed, and it is naturally swollen; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or it must be that I shall make thee know the cure of fistula which is done by hand.
Fistula occurs in all body parts; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and the arteries, and the nerves, or the throat, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and it often affects the property of the principal limb, and similar parts.
And all the fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to cure, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not heal until it reaches the point I have said, and you are confident in the treatment, and you see how to recognize it, take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, place it on it;
and if the fistula is curved, find a fine linen thread to place within it, because the linen can bend around its curvature;
and if the fistula has openings and you cannot thoroughly probe it with threads, administer a cleansing enema through one of the openings, for moisture flows from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then apply salve to your power, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and see whether it is pierced by a foreign object, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the places I have told you about, then apply the compress as I have said, and remove all the foreign matter and rotten flesh that are inside;
and then treat it until it is healthy, and if the fistula is deeply positioned in the right place, you should apply compresses thoroughly as much as you can. Then put moistened cloths in medicinal water, and pour them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then apply salve to healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not known by them, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, so treat.
If the vein or nerve does not affect the major limbs as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, scrape until all the corruption is removed, then treat the wound with substances that promote healing until it heals.
and if it is not healed, and re-bandage as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
and expose and remove the corruption completely until you reach the bottom, then reset it.
and if it is thus healed, that is well. If not, know that the corruption is too far advanced, that you cannot remedy it; if there is no other way but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupt bone, and you can extract it with forceps, do so using an appropriate instrument. And if there are many bones, extract all of them, leaving none behind.
and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something caustic on the wound torotten it, and let it remain until the flesh is rotten around the bones, then the bones will be more easily removed;
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, reset only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part of the corruption reaching to the marrow of the bone; And it is necessary to sew and cover until the corruption reaches the marrow, and then treat until it heals.
And I will tell you of an abscess that happened in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man between thirty years and age, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, such that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to wait before incising.
but the foolhardy man incised it too soon, causing the abscess to open extensively and drain much matter, becoming a fistula, and there came much pus that continuously discharged bile and moisture from the body.
and many men treated it for about two years, and there was no wise surgeon in the art of hands until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they had treated him, and the corruption from what drained through the pus affected his body greatly. and the side of the face by the eye became red, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some entered against another from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and scooped out part of the wound until I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, with the decay extending to the inner bone.
I deemed that the decay only affected what I saw of the bone, and thought there was no other decay beyond what I removed.
and began to treat the wound with long-lasting medicines, but could not heal it.
and then resumed, and again exposed the bone as before, and found the decay continuing in the bone. I removed it, and puzzled over how to heal the wound. but I could not so much as touch a palm's breadth of the bone, and I drew it completely out, then reduced it with medicines; and he was healed and sewed quickly, and it did not seem necessary to restart the work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of death from him. For during the evacuation of bloodletting often occurred, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone a hard scar formed, and it was well situated and had no harm nor any adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take the linen, and hold it at the end of the bone that is open, and instruct someone to extend it upwards; and put another piece of woolen cloth larger than the first linen, and tie it over the flesh that is beside the bone, and pull the end, so that you can draw out the corrupt flesh from beside, and uncover the flesh at the place where you intend to treat it, lest the stitch damage the flesh;
and place a coal or a stick under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
and it must be as much so that one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then uncover all the flesh;
then place the coal under it, and then extend the incision from one part to another where the corruption is, and let the incision be as long as the corruption, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then remove the corrupted joint, and expose the bone on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but copper.
and if the corruption is from a stab wound of the hand, or a stab wound of the foot, this is very serious, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corruption, how it presents. and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but ensure that the vein or nerve is not opposed to this.
and know that the incision and suturing with copper for these bones are many, according to the alignment of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. and for this, it must be prepared according to each type of work its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you think about the instrument you will need according to what is appropriate.
The shoulder dislocates either internally or externally;
and when you have treated that corruption by the cure of medicines, and they do not help, then you must operate on that limb until you reach the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient may either escape death or the greater malice, which is due to the defect of the limb;
and the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, there follows the corruption of limb to limb, and takes place throughout the body;
if it is due to the bite of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes and similar ones, if the corruption is at the head of the foot, then apply the copper, and give no chance for it to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, apply the copper at the joint, so that the corruption does not spread to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, apply the copper to the elbow;
and if it passes through the knife, it is death, and it cannot be cured except by the amount of its virtue.
and do so altogether when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint;
and if it comes or pierces, cover the entire wound. and if it rises to the leg, cover at the joint of the knee.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to let the patient die.
and the manner of covering or sewing the limb is that you tie it above and below, stretch some ministers one end down, and others ministers the other end up, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ends by one span wide, so that the bone is uncovered.
then cover or sew it, and place a linen bandage on each side, so that the thread does not touch the healthy flesh, thereby avoiding another injury or abscess.
And if the bleeding continues when you work, quickly cauterize the flesh, or apply some restraining powders.
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then tie the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man we encountered:
he suffered from a blackness that seemed like it was burned by fire, and this corruption first came to his big toe on the foot, spreading throughout the entire foot;
and when he saw the corruption, he hastened to bandage the foot, and it was cured;
and some time later, the corruption returned to his hand at the thumb, and he came to me, and I applied post-bathing compresses after cleansing his body, but the corrosion did not cease;
and he begged me to cauterize his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of curing the corruption. and I also doubted whether if I cut his hand off he would die, for the virtue of the man was weak;
and he became completely despondent, returned to his land, and hastened to have his hand treated, and was healed.
and I have included this only because something else needs to be done, if we need it.
Sometimes an abscess forms in the solid flesh and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus. and then it will rupture and be pierced, and the pus will escape, leaving the eyeockets as if they were vessels. and the skin that is above is also as delicate as the finest cloth, and does not run all the way to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain", and are not called "fistula".
but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone and perforates it, it is called "fistula".
and the skin if it is such that you must peel off all of it around, and especially when it is delicate, like fine cloth. and does not rot due to its corruption.
And if you suspect that the skin will rot, and the corruption is not to the bone, and the skin is thick flesh, then cure it by scraping thus.
look if the breasts are large, and the bowels which are in them have a foul odor, then use the Egyptian medicated enema which is made thus: take aloe, oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it in water and honey, and administer the enema to the breast, and hold the orifice. and let the medicine remain in place for two hours, then extract it by expelling it.
do this several times, until the breasts are softened, and the foulness is removed.
and sometimes it is cleansed with an astringent of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you should use ashes from vine wood, pour water over them, then strain, and administer as a cleansing enema until you know that the bowels are well cleaned;
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then administer an enema of water and honey or with a little litharge added. or you may administer an enema of honey and sweet wine, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine helps to expel the disease.
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the bowels are well cleansed, administer an enema of what causes flesh to grow, and you should use a diaphoretic plaster, made with rose oil and wine.
or you clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of which I have said the properties or treat of the ointments;
and if the opening in the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, you widen it with a iron a little, and put on a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
and if the wound is too wide, you sew it up just enough around the edge so that the tube or clyster can enter, and if the opening that lets the fluid out is above, you leave it lower or below.
and if you cannot bring the side down as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner that the bow runs to the lowest place where it is, for when the bow is full, do not leave any flesh between them if you cannot bring the side down as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner: that the bow runs lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bow;
that the bow runs lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bow; and apply conservative medications over the wound, and place them under the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then bring the forces to the hole in the side a little larger than the first, and apply sweat ointment on the other cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to lighten the bow; do not remove the large external cloth for several days until after one day.
and he who is over the punctured chest, often removes it to remove the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it be venom or pus or enough, or digested or undigested.
and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner that you see the nature that surges over the punctured chest, know that the breasts are already infected, and bring the health.
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are men who have slow healing of wounds, and among these some do the opposite.
and if an indigestion occurs several days after the chest, know that the chest has not healed properly;
and if the chest takes a long time to heal and is distant, apply drying medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diaphoretic, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.
take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and anoint with old wine equal in strength.
then let it dry and use it.
and this same preparation works better when cooked honey is used, when diaphoretic ointments are not available. Alternatively, take myrrh, frankincense, and aloes, grind them, and mix with the honey when it is hot.
and then I wrap it up, and place it over the breast, and sometimes an aromatologist administers longe and roots of celestial lilies, which are as good as wheat and corn flour; and in the use of simples or compounded: grind them, and make powder, and apply it on the honey as I have said, and use it;
and if the wound is long and not treated with this treatment, then know that the corruption is well advanced and makes an impression on the bone, or in hard members, or in the ligaments; if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places.
and when it is old and not attended to, it comes to an abscess, spreading and causes severe pain until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance, it may even destroy the entire nail.
and it causes corrosion down to the bone, causing painful decay, and the head of the finger swells, and the color changes.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the wound does not heal, then you must cut away all the remaining flesh from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact.
and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to sting, and becomes bluish, then you should place a wick under the nail where the flesh stings, and lift it up. Carefully and gently cut away that fine tissue, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove it completely. then continue the application of ointments until he is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cauterize and cut out the decayed part, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the bone decayed, cauterize it from within as was said before, and continue the application of ointments until it is healed.
and if it is fractured and painful, you must first set it properly.
then cauterize the nail of the thumb with a sharp spatula by cutting across and ensure that the cut does not extend to the flesh beneath the nail, as this would cause too much pain to the patient.
and if it happens, place something on it to soothe.
the dislocation that arises in the hands of some men by chance is either all flesh or has part or it has bone, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birthplace is in any of our joints.
The one that is pricked on the palm of the hand does not move, and the one pricked at the wrist of the hand may move by chance.
The size of that which is fleshy is light in such manner: Cut it at its root with a broad blade.
That which is pricked at the root of the joint should be carefully treated. hold it with copper.
In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, then cure it until it is healed.
The movements that come together in this way come either by birth, or suddenly from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
It is necessary that you mend that wound so that it repairs according to its natural forms; then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so they do not adhere; or you place between two pieces of fine linen, until the eyes are secured as is appropriate.
If the burn comes to either of these with the palm, cut this scar as is appropriate.
If his veins are swollen and enveloped with excessive melancholic fluids, which come from several parts of the body;
and more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Therefore, you must administer to him once an evacuation of black bile, and then cure him with the basilicon.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is that of the copa, and cuts or burns the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw all the blood forcefully.
The cutting is done according to this method: Raise the first leg with hot water extremely strong, until the large vein is made fine and thin, then hold the leg of the patient from below the knee to the part beneath the knee.
Then incise the vein on the inside, outside, or both sides, with a large cut, then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, until as much vein flows as the patient can endure.
And then close it, and instruct the patient to apply meat that turns black when cooked.
and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The alleviations of the pain are done in this manner: raise the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg in hot water until it becomes red, and engorge the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, and then apply it to the vein from the bottom to the top of the knee, or in the area below the ankle;
then work the skin with a lancet, and cauterize the vein from each side until it appears when you feel it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters or through skin it seems as if a white cord is present;
then let the blood flow out until it is elevated from the skin, and then prick it lightly with a needle, then cut in another place above three fingers.
then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lance it lightly, as you have done, and prick with another needle, as you did first.
then lance another size, or more if you need, then lance it lightly, and lance with two fingers of your hand, then trace and lance until you reach the second size.
then extract bit by bit until all the force is gone, then apply a poultice;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle through the entire length of the strong double thread, tie it, and pull, and apply ointment over the wound, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. and ensure it does not move, for if it moves, you cannot pull or lift it, and this harms the patient.
and when you have pulled it all out, place wetted wool in wine and rose oil over the wound. and treat until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it properly, but do not slit it. and draw it out as we have said before.
The form of iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut but rather slits the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein. But it should be large, as we have said, and here is its form:
This vein is implanted in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture.
and by chance it may arise in other places such as the legs, and this happens from putrefaction that comes beneath the skin, just as worms come within the body, twisting between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then the loins change, and the veins begin to come out, as if they were a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, you must wrap it with a piece of linen about one and a half inches to two inches wide, and the bandage, and let the linen hang from the leg, and every time there is no point at the opening, you wrap it with the linen and the bandage;
and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it entirely from its root, so that it comes out completely; for if you cut it entirely, it will enter the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, or swelling, and a harmful condition;
for the sake of which it must be treated little by little until healed, and nothing or a core should remain;
and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of long, or ten, and one hon (a unit of length) twenty already came to me, from which it protrudes from ten palms in length, and when you cut it, it bursts with one or two punctures, and you pierce it until the end, so that all comes out;
and let the matter within be drained, and apply medications preventing putrefaction for several days, then treat it as with abscesses.
and sometimes this vein flows with the fingers, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or toe, and there is little puncturing, and from which it escapes with the fingers.
Cure therefore as we have said before.
verses that grow between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and moves up and down throughout the body, and one feels it well as it travels from limb to limb, until it destroys the skin where it goes, and causes great distress.
and it is caused by putrefaction of some humors, such as coming from worms and larvae or ascarids or the intestines.
and there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye. and this happens many times.
When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot force it when it goes:
then it must be that you tie the vein above and below tightly with a strong thread. Then cut it open and drain it forcefully. If the blood does not flow freely in the flesh, then cauterize it with fire until it stops.
and the greatest harm it causes is that it can corrupt the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the thread tightly below it, then cut open and drain it forcefully.
and it is necessary to use the patient for washing of body with soluble medicines for bad putrid humors, and beware of meats producing putrefaction.
of the pain that comes from wind This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I have seen those whom I am telling you about. I was called to treat a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, as if live silver when cut from another.
The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little while later spreads throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm.
then it returned to that place throughout the body, as I saw.
I wondered much how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease proceed in such a way. In every way, I wanted very much that the pain in her shoulder would move to another place, but I did not want it at all, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a cold body and her veins were uncovered, and because of this, those winds constrained appeared.
and they do not appear according to this reason for those who are weak and have moist bodies with covered veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, scrape off the top and underneath quickly, and then cover over until those humors are constrained to their place. and cauterize the skin;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, cauterize the area where the humors are displaced, such as with bitter pills or blistering warts, and similar things.
Arrows come in various types, according to their shapes and the parts of the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and joined together. and some have two angles, and others have tongues, and some where there are pieces.
and that which falls onto any member falls according to two manners: or onto a principal member it strikes, as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls onto any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: then you must be wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely extracted, then you should draw it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the sphenoid bone which is above the brain moves, is when there is scotomia and stiffness and vertigo in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perchance it is without strength in the nostrils or the ears; and perchance it affects speech and voice; and the swelling of the wound is moist white, resembling a pulse, and it swells as if scalded by hot water;
and if this sign is apparent, keep it under treatment, and extract the arrow if it has not yet passed.
The sign of an arrow when it strikes or pierces the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and one feels it as if it were lodged in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulses, and brings black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know for sure that death follows.
And the sign of the arrow that cannot be removed by plumage is that without bubbles of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and warms up.
And if the arrow strikes in the sole of the foot, it affects the small bones; and causes great pain and cries out loudly; and the movement of the entire limb from the shoulders.
And if the arrow drops into the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with something undigested from the meat.
And if the arrow drops into the belly, and in its jump nothing but hay comes out through the intestinal tract, it has no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine flows out and stops, the patient feels great pain. The wound is mortal.
The other limb, as the hand and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the elbow and the thigh and the legs, and limbs similar to these, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
It happened to the man that an arrow fell into his eye at the root of the nose: I extracted it, and removed it from the other side under the ear fat, and he was healed without any difficulty.
And extracted an arrow that fell into the ear fat under the paper, and the arrow was embedded, and could only be reached by its point towards the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, made of light iron without ears.
the patient was cured, and no bad accidents occurred.
And he extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears.
I removed the thorns, and extracted them thoroughly as I withdrew, and the Christian was cured.
And he extracted an arrow from the man, who had it in his chest or belly, and thought that he was dying.
and after XXX days had passed, his condition did not change at all. I incised the arrow, applied a dressing, and extracted it, and no bad accidents occurred.
And if you wish for a man who has an arrow fall or pass through him, and the wound is stitched up;
and if the arrow remains inside, and does not change its natural position, nor causes harm in any of its natural functions.
And if you wish for another man, where an arrow falls into his face, and the wound is stitched up; and remains there causing great pain;
and much other similar cases.
And thrust an arrow into the king's man, who was struck among the white hairs, and it was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was completely removed.
I was called for the treatment after it was injured for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I examined it with great subtlety, and did not feel it at all; and there was a prickling and pain over his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed an ointment poultice of atratife on it, because the wounds were not swelling. and I saw the wound from the arrow.
and I saw the wound from the arrow. I applied the poultice for three days, and redressed the wound again. The patient felt the arrow point one day inside his nose.
and he tells him. I applied corrosive salve to the wound with my clean hands until it was opened, and probed it, feeling the head of the arrow as it dried at its base;
then I applied the corrosive salve to the opening of the wound, until the head of the arrow became clearly visible;
and passed well through the ends within four months, and then I enlarged the wound so that I could insert the forceps, and pulled from both sides, and could not come out;
then I continued to invent and devise ways with instruments until I got it right on the fifth day with properly made forceps, as will be shown in the end of this chapter when I extracted it, and restored the wound.
And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not mention, for books cannot contain everything;
but the master surgeons compare only a small amount of it, and on what is present and lacking, they find nine works and nine instruments for the removal of foreign things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are embedded in members in two ways: or through the bone where they enter, or by another part;
and that which has pierced through it or where it enters, is an arrow passing into the flesh, and has pierced only once now.
And if it does not pierce now, let it be left until the flesh rots entirely, and the arrowhead is extracted.
and if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let it be left as it is for several days, and the wound change each day.
and then it will pierce. And if it does not pierce, make an incision through the entire thickness of the flesh, until the bone is widened, and then extract it.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body such that it cannot be seen, then seek it out thoroughly. and if you feel it, draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot draw it out due to the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then widen the wound so that the arrow can be removed.
and draw out the arrow if you can. If it has flukes that hold it in place, remove the flesh from two sides of the arrow at the part you can grasp, and then break or bend the flukes of the arrow so you can draw it out.
and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, as it would be harder to remove.
And if you cannot do it at once, let it stay until the flesh between the bones is rotten, then remove it, for the extraction would be painful. And if the bleeding causes you to do otherwise, then administer what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
and beware of cutting the nerve and the vein, and find a way to extract the arrow quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck, for this is the greatest aid that can be given. And if you cannot do so, then set him according to what the symptoms show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where it pierces any part of the body, or where the skin is swollen such that one can see or feel it distinctly:
Cut up high, as long as the forceps can grasp, and then extract. if it now jumps.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot exit, leave it still, and then重新开始提取直到它出来。
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, remove the entire shaft;
and if the shaft has fallen, and you see that you need to administer a thrust, then apply the instrument diagonally, so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument;
and then extract it. If the arrow is embedded, apply the instrument with the point entering it, to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow falls or pierces in the abdomen or bladder or side, and it is nearby, and you can cut out, then you must cut out.
and be careful not to cut the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if skill is needed. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to that of a bird's beak, and here is its form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the needle is also similar to that of a bird's feather, for piercing the tip of the arrow, as shown in its form:
There are thirty-one veins where one can bleed, of which sixteen are principal, that is to say: Two bumps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is on the nose bridge; and the two glands that are in or under the chin; and the two veins that are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins commonly treated are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic lies on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly"; it is above the fascia, and it is the vein through which treatment is administered, which clearly appears over the pocket.
And the ulnar vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two veins;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the left thigh, and the second is saphena, which is on the right ankle; and the vein called "nephros", which is on the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The healing of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the healthier part, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a rod, so that the two veins behind the ears are visible in two places connected to the head; place your thumb there, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, cut into it;
then take the lancette, and pierce through the vein to the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire length of the vein, cut away the skin and vein thoroughly in two depths, and let the blood flow until you see it.
then extract and bind, while it is healthy;
and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
The remedy for the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for migraines, soothing, and long-term eye weakness, and for the body's watery tears around the eyes;
and the qualities of the remedy are as I say: and it is that the patient's collarbone is extracted until the two veins are clearly visible; and feel the pulse beneath your throat, and then proceed with caution;
then lift the heart above the vein towards your index finger, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein upwards, and the cover, as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton. and then bind it properly, and leave it until it is healed.
and we have also spoken about their binding and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
The treatment of the vein on the forehead is as effective as the treatment of the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, and for headaches, and for redness.
and the quality is such that the patient twists their neck until the veins become visible. then take the instrument called "fosseur," whose form is as follows:
and place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see. then straighten the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is secure, and only once the work is done with a wide flame.
In all cases, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too hot; and the flame diagonally, for the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may break when it is subtle.
The health of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps them, and with coughing, and with flushing, and with the redness in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their health are such that diseases escape their roots by twisting from any bond, as before;
then the health, and let its health be through the vein, a bit long of flame a bit wide, for there is no part of flesh. And if the flames are subtle, they may break;
then cause the blood to flow as much as you need, and then fasten with cloth, and tie it tightly.
The health of the vein from the neck is good for cold, and hot fever, and diseases of the face, as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
and the quality of the vein is such that the patient feels pain in his throat, then he stretches his neck to your left hand, and take the thin sharp flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well here, and the sweat will begin to flow now;
and do not apply it too strongly, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is quickly restored.
The health of the two glands helps in the narrowing of the throat, and in the onset of palsy, and much to diseases, and petechiae, and corrosion, and herpes, and ecchymoses;
and the qualities of the health cause diseases to leave their roots from both sides, as we have said;
and let the masters be above the affected part of the patient, and the disease settle on the seat, then health the vein along a long stretch somewhat widely, then draw off tempered blood or as much as is needed;
then do the same on the other vein, then untie the knot, and moderately constrain all the veins, so that diseases do not strangle; and let [the wound] heal until the morning, that the wound be healed.
Of the sinews of the glands The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to the decay of gums, and cracks in the lips, and around the nose and between them.
And the quality of the healthy one is to make the patient sit facing you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one being on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by their black color, and by the small black veins around them:
then prick both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then prick the largest from each side, and likewise do with the two veins above and below, for they are of the same manner.
of the health above the tongue The veins beneath the tongue help after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is due to narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the uvea, and diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healing is that the patient's tongue becomes pale, and you look underneath on each side a black vein:
heal both and do not overapply, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly healed are treated according to two methods:
or by pricking with a large flint blade or a subtle olive oil blade, and it is called "anisel"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The form of the martyr's flame is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
And it has need to open the full veins filled with large visible blood, and those containing much discolored blood; and it is the form of olive oil flame:
And it is more subtle and pointed, and is for cleansing subtle veins, where there is thin yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the shoulder, and the abdomen;
and it is fitting for the healer that he bleed and avoid the artery below. And if he wounds the artery and there is a flow of blood, it is fitting to stop the bleeding as I have said; and must not be burned by the flame, but cut like flax.
And if the vein does not clearly open, then you must extract it, and replace it with another; or you take some raing from it, or you treat with it the vein inserted in the arm: it clearly opens; and cut the vein like flax, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the site of the injury, then you must similarly extract the arm, and touch the site until you feel the pulse; then mark the head of the shoulder, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with flame. and be sure not to injury the artery when you see the head swollen, for it is the artery. draw it then.
And if you see it bulge up high as urine in a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that this is a vein of the artery. hasten then, and place your finger lengthwise, then remove your finger when the vein is still filled with blood, for this often happens. bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient.
and for fear, do not let him move until he is healed.
And if the wound is not cleansed, and it pains you, and medical aid is not present, cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the injury will be great. and cleanse the wound.
And take a bark of the fig tree, cut it open, and take one half and tie it well until the next day;
and if the wound is cleansed, that is good. and if not, treat it as we have said, with powders that cleanse the wound.
and the applications are not effective in many cases due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
The treatment of the vein in the middle helps to address blood from the head above, and from the body beneath, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
and the patient should be careful for the nerve beneath, and if it is too deep, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, then the healing will be effective, but by chance it cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and since it is very subtle in some people, it is necessary to anesthetize the area with the application of the instrument. and cut the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut along its length.
The treatment of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is best to cauterize with olive oil flame or myrtle oil, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch either nerve or artery. In any case, it is best to use the lightest vein, and do not harm anything if it needs to be done for the first time, and then we repeat. and sometimes the eyes swell in some people when it needs to be done for the first time, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the wound is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about a healer, is that healing is undertaken only to preserve health, and to avoid future illnesses.
and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are cut: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and let the healing be done at the beginning of spring and autumn, after eating, when the signs of overeating appear;
and let the healing be done on the first or third day, two or three days after.
The healing that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour, but when need arises, it can be done at any hour and at all times.
and it is not fitting to cauterize children up to fourteen years of age, nor women who are carrying a fetus from four months up to seven. Medicine should not be given to the elderly who have passed sixty years.
And when any wish to be cauterized, regardless of the manner, it is fitting that he evacuates the bowels with a light enema, if there is little retained feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines their foul putrefied matters harmful to the principal limbs.
nor should those who are too heated by meats, nor those who are drunk to any degree, nor dropsical persons, be cauterized.
and if one wishes to cauterize after colic, passion, vomiting, and belly discharge, and frequent intercourse for a woman, and labor, and staying up or fasting, and those who have fully used their strength, either by weapon or bodily exertion.
then subtly resolve the humors, if the blood is excessive, through meat and through beverages and through medicines, if you have the power;
then with a bath, if nothing prevents you, to subdue the blood, and to heal the vein below the foot between the toes, as we have said;
and keep him on that day from work, from pricking, and from excess, and similar things;
and be bound and joined, and let the ligature above be higher than the one being tied, and rub the arm two or three times, then apply moderate tension to the ligature, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
and then rub the shoulder with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
then moisten the vein with a bit of old oil, then place your thumb on the vein beneath the shoulder in the spot where you wish to cauterize, ensuring the vein does not burn.
For there are veins that flow as freely as cords when cauterized, and some are so full of windiness that when you place the flame on them, you must immediately remove it, as you cannot open the vein. Thus, one encounters such cases. and if the vein works too narrowly, then the cauterization is too narrow; therefore, the causer must be cautious in such matters.
And if the vein works the first time, that is good; If not, repeat it a little below that place or quickly above, if the arm is not swollen.
And if the arm is swollen, and the patient feels better, let it be for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance abscesses may form.
do not take a bath, then repeat the procedure if it seems necessary.
and if the opening is small, or the wound is shallow and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then burn right into that opening with all the flame directly.
and work a bit hastily, so that the joints swell; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swollen, do not re-open the wound, and apply a bit of olive oil, for it lightens the body from blood, and dissolves the oil in this joint.
and thus administer the oil in each wound that you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same procedure makes treacle and balm when applied to the joint. if too large, let the blood and its parts escape subtlety.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, especially when it is not drained enough for that time or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and place on the body a wet sponge soaked in water and slightly warm salt for an hour;
and you must do this after the blood from the vein has been drained, and if it remains in place after a few days without any blackness or greenish color, it will not harm him; and if you see, place on it some aloes or myrrh soaked in calamus, mustanga, or similar.
And often an abscess occurs and appears in the wound of the basilica:
Place your hand there, and if you find the joint soft upon pressing with your hand, this is an unfavorable sign. Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said there, for accidentally you might cut an artery.
but apply a dry plaster to harden the joint, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the swelling is black, let it bleed until it turns red. and if you see it large, let it be until it becomes subtle (or small). and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it must be that he who is full and strong, and needs extraction of blood, let there be made a larger wound, and may the flames be wide;
and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it must be bled little but often, and let it be bled by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this way of bleeding is safe from hemorrhage and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide bleedings.
And for him whose body needs bleeding, it is advisable to give soft food with the juice of pomegranates; If he is heated, let him bleed three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat soft food before bleeding, such as bread moistened with honey syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and lentils, and well-scented syrup.
And if it swells in the arm, after the discharge of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
And if it swells and becomes sore in the arm, and has swollen before, when it is weakened by great swelling, it is fitting that he be allowed to swell a little and a little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
And if it swells in the arm after the first swelling, and he has a strong cor, he should swell seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
And if it swells in another place, he should swell on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and it brings on fever; if there is need to drain much quantity, and enlarge the puncture until it bleeds profusely; then since you should attend to all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on his pulse when it is steady, that death not come instead of bleeding, and this happens often when surgeons are negligent.
and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated and bleed for a second time, and the puncture is closed, that you press forcefully on it; nor if it is crooked, that he extend the arm hastily, for that would be ill done;
but let it grow until it heals a second time; or prick with the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen to the point of the vein dissolves, and place some thread soaked in water and press lightly on it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
And if the need arises to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the hand because it is composed.
And the way to clean it is that the patient should put their hand in hot water until the fingers turn red.
then tie it moderately so that the vein is clearly visible, then clean it now through, neither wide nor long.
and let the punctures be wide, and clean well near the wrist joint, and if no blood can come out, put the hand in hot water and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough.
and if it is hot, do not re-butter the hand in warm water, for it will be more exposed to cold in winter than in summer;
and the healing of this vein is more preserved from all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
Stretch the hand, and immerse it in warm water until the vein is swollen, then remove it; and if the vein is at an angle, and you cover it completely, it will not cause any harm;
and do not apply it too strongly, for the nerves are completely exposed without flesh, and then place the hand in warm water if the skin is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn enough blood as needed, put a piece of wool and salt on the vein to quickly seal it, and do this for each limb.
The cure for the vein in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse (likely referring to a hernia), and do everything as I have said for the right hand.
The sickness of the throat is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the lungs, retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its efficacy is that the patient boils water and rubs it on the vein until it swells, and binds it above the joint of the foot. and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot flows much lymph.
and bind it accordingly or where the lymph is larger, or at the ankle, which moves well.
And if you bind it at the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and bind them from the side as when tying.
and let the flames ascend.
And if the wound cannot issue from it, set the foot in the water, and let it well empty the vein.
And if the salt needs to be applied for the first time, then repeat it slightly above on the second application, because the eyes are salty.
do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other side equally.
The loam of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its wound values for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its application is that the patient should immerse or place it in a bath, and extract four dozes above the ankle by twisting, otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, apply the salt in all ways that you can, and by passing it through. and it should be moved when you cut it, for the vein is open, and it is very tender to human hands.
and it should be moved when you cut it, for the vein is open, and it is very tender to human hands. And if you do not find it, search along the outer side of the thigh or back of the foot, and toward the little toe; be careful of the nerves.
and let the blood flow until you see it stop, then undo the bandage, and place cotton and bind it. it is now healed.
Suctions are made of horns, or iron, or glass;
and suction is performed in two ways: or by injury and drawing blood, or by injuring.
And this ventilation which is by injury is according to two manners: or it is by all fire, or by fire;
and ventilation which is made by injury and extraction of blood is made in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely at the head; and the other is at the neck; and two others in both sides of the neck; and the cupping near the chin; and the suction cups for the two shoulders; and the suction cup on the kidneys; and the suction cups in the two arms; and the suction cups in the two legs; and the suction cups in the two ankles;
and the suction cups do not treat blood from large veins, but only from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, they do not weaken one much, as is done with the treatment of a vein. and it should not be administered, neither with too much heat nor without any heat, in any disease that comes from overfilling, until the entire body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for customs, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and during and in each time;
because there are those who, when they have need to bleed, feel the head first;
and there are those who feel fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and in the neck, and darkness before their eyes;
and those who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood; and there are those who think, and see by vision blood and pains and deaths and similar things;
And when we see these signs, and especially if it is between the hours, we order to bleed after three hours of the day.
The sinew of the muscle aids in the breaking of the head that comes upon them, and it is not fitting that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is in the place of the sinew of the cephalic, and it is not fitting that he who has a cold complexion use it, or who has catarrh, for it does them much harm.
And because of this, it is not fitting that those who have cold diseases of the head use it.
And he who often suffers from this, becomes more forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the cupping slightly lower due to the fear of increased forgetfulness.
The ventilation at the neck is in place of the sinew of the head and the basilic. And because of this, it is effective for stricture of the veins, and for cutting the channel of the brachial, and soon, and for distension;
and it must be held lightly, for if it is held too tightly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
The ventosations at the second ribs of the neck are for headaches, eye diseases, migraines, stranglement, and tooth root pain, and are placed in the healthy area of the basilica;
and you must instruct the healthy person to place their hand, ensuring they do not compress the artery and do not cause bleeding.
The ventosations over the chin are for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar diseases that affect the mouth. and are placed in the healthy area of the two lips.
The wind disorders of the shoulders cause diseases that come from heat and filling.
The ventosations of the cotes are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the soldier not to pierce too deep, for the liver is naked of flesh, and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the buttock is equivalent to hemorrhoids from the fundament, and for diseases beneath. It should be large, and made of iron, as it needs to hold well. and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break. and it causes large wounds.
The cups of the legs cure openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the limbs, and of the liver, and alleviate tumors;
and they are placed on the two ankles, and on all ways they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many conditions.
The manner of placing the cup is to first ensure it is empty and then apply it steadily, putting it on quickly, moving it evenly, and not stopping until you see the area turn red and swollen, and perceive the redness of the blood.
then apply heat, and remove the cups, and observe the condition of the body, for some have tender flesh and clear pores. if it must be struck once only, and wide wounds must be made, and somewhat deep; and let it bleed lightly.
And if the swelling is large, it must be struck twice: the first time to dilate the way of the large blood.
And if the swelling is very hard, it must be struck a third time;
and when we wish to let a little blood at a time, we prick only once. and if we wish to let much blood, we prick frequently;
and if the skin is thick, they should be pierced, and the points are such that the veins must be suddenly perforated, and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin and narrow pores that you anoint the eyes of the suction cups with a pungent and dissolving oil: if it is in winter, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is in summer, with mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or some other similar one.
And if the excess is large and cold, take ambergris oil, or balsamite oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the one who is being healed has flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put oil, but he should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or pear water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
And those who have much moisture, let them rise from juniper, or cedar water, or myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
And those who have large accumulations rise using old wine, or sewage water, or a decoction of angelica or chamomile, or some other similar substance;
and it is not fitting to use a suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
and do not sleep after the suction treatment, and it is necessary that he be warmed when he is to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
And watch that the one who is being treated is choleric, and if the wound is too hot and inflamed. then it is fitting that he take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuces cooked in oil, and similar things. and eats little, and mutton, and moist meats.
and eats little, and mutton, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey and medium-smelling fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eats little, and eats small and young birds and pigeons;
And on the day he will bleed with cups, he should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some men treacle or musk before or after the bleeding, to strengthen the main limbs; And make it fine powder, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink.
The cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the lung, and in podagra, and on the belly and throat and ribs and hip, for these members do not tolerate being pierced through, and one only uses heat to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the nipple discharges.
to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the abdomen and on the buttocks to alleviate the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue possibly the abscess, or expels the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only. and sometimes they are applied together with fire, and at other times filled with cold water, as in certain diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water in which herbs suitable for it have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm of broadleaf, and have an aperture or hole in the middle one small puncture, as if to put a needle, and made of tin, placed facing forward so that it does not blister the patient when applied to the limb.
And have in the middle a bar of tin or iron across, to place a candleholder, and let there be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the age of those who use them.
for the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and of the thin from those of the fat.
And one should place this suction cup on the limb in this way:
Take the wax or liniment flask, and place it within the suction cup through the rod that is placed within the suction cup, so that the liquid be at the bottom of the suction cup without burning the patient.
and then place it on the limb, and your thumbs should be over the puncture as we have said, so that when one looks, the vapor goes away, and remove the suction cup.
and apply the liniment as before, and repeat often if you need to.
In the suction cup which is administered for diseases of the pleura, in any acute case, there is no rod nor puncture, and it is applied only when it is filled with fluid, and is placed on the limb.
and this is the form:
Sucking teats cannot be performed only in members where one cannot place cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in those of flesh, such as thighs or noses, and other similar parts;
and the quality of the teat is such that when you find teats in sweet, clear water without corruption, you should take them.
and place them in sweet water until they become plump and have nothing in their bellies; and then apply vein incision and cupping, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the teats on it.
and when they will be full and fall, if it is a vein or one can put a suction cup there, if he puts it, because it matters little afterwards.
If not, lift the arm away, and then with water, very well, and then apply it;
and if the arm remains too swollen after the body of the veins, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it there, until the veins are constricted;
and if the veins multiply, put on broken glass or blisters, and similar things, until they are constricted;
or you put on the arm half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry out on the arm, it will constrict now;
and if you have more need of them, take other lancets.
And if the lancets do not wish to take the blood, rub the edge of fresh blood on it, or prick it with a needle until the blood comes out, then place them in it, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will rust.
and when you see that they rust, sprinkle a little aloes and ground salt or ash on them, and now they will rust.
This begins the book on fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear reader, that the leaves of this chapter are rare, for none of the ancient books have mentioned them, nor did any read their letters.
and for this reason knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have treated this knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are prepared, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Therefore, we must state in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise ones place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur to someone, it is necessary to quickly treat the patient on both sides, if nothing else attends him, such as weakness of body, or illness, or old age; or where the skin is either too thin or too cold;
and take cold wood, that is to say cold stakes, and meat of bird and chevron, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess or spread of matter in the limb.
if the patient returns to his former regimen.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it must be nourished with meats that promote good healing or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, meat of fowl, oysters, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. And in good nourishment, the healing is shown and the fractures are healed more quickly.
And know that bones of the old and decrepit cannot heal or fuse well according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but do not neglect to reduce it over the broken bone and large tendons which harden and unite the limb together, until it forces itself as it was before; and do not complete his work entirely, and for this reason he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there are fractures that go across, and others that occur obliquely, just like the cuts of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go across, and others that occur obliquely, just like the cuts of a pen for writing. And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack.
And in every manner have his tool, and his instrument proper for the restoration, according to what memory brings to his place;
and the break of the bone is known by that the limb is twisted, and appears well by palpation, and sounds upon pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting and it does not sound upon touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have tortuosity, or fissure, or small fracture. If it does not suit you to move it by hand, but place medicines that follow here, and then hold now delicately.
And know that the fracture that goes in length, and are the two parts disjoined, you must now put them in equal alignment, as abscesses cover and heal.
and if abscesses form and come to the surface, let him leave them alone for a day, until the abscesses subside.
then set them equal to the degree that you can lightly and securely do so, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration where there are pieces.
then hold them steady, as instructed later.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, set it for two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or by your hand if it is small members, or by two strings, or by one string and by your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you must reduce them by all means of addition in their places as much as you can, and guard that through your work no injury or pain come to the patient.
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if you think it is not quite right:
if the shoulder is set well, and not restrained too much or pressed as those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the limb do during their work, as we have often desired.
And when the limb is in place, well restrain the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it should be placed in proper position so that it does not feel any pain.
and ensure that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it should be placed in proper position so that it does not feel any pain. and ensure that it is placed correctly, so that no twists remain when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
for there are small limbs, such as hands and feet and similar: so it is necessary to wrap them in soft, fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg:
so it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard linen cloth, for the wide cloths encircle the large limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no unevenness.
then tie with light stoppers, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire cloth, then go above the break and restrain it less, so that the break can be moved a little away from the break.
and gradually soften the ligament a little, until you perceive a large part of the healthy flesh, then take the other ligament and repeat this process around again over the broken bone;
then return to the part over the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above.
then insert pieces of linen or cloth between the secured ligaments, making sure they are all equal. then tie everything securely with the bandage, and place well-made pads on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that reduces the swelling and draws out the abscess on top, and leave it that way for several days.
then hold them on your elbows, and let them be of the width of half a broad cane's thickness, or of wood from which picks are made, or of palm ribs, and let them be according to this shape:
but it must be that the elbow on which one places the fracture is a bit wider and larger than the others;
and let it be as long as is necessary for the size or length of the limb; then hold them on the elbows as you did at the first moment, then tie above a suitable thread as in the first moment at the fracture; narrower here, and less there;
and the threads must be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
for if the threads are thick, as I have said in works of plants that make their leaves from twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, because the leaf cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than two diameters of space between each thread.
And if the patient is injured by the heads of arrows after the closure in their healthy places, then place lint or a linen bandage over them so that they do not become infected.
When the wound is burned and the tendons are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
And know that it is not advisable to extract arrows from all broken limbs on the first day. For when the members are large, it is not advisable to place threads too tightly for more than 5 days or 7, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring.
and here is the method of old plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take flour that stays on the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in many dispositions, especially for women and small children, for it is not either too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take zinc oxide and litharge and egg and arsenic and Arabic gum and myrrh, mix well; myrrh and aloes, mix well; alechil VIIII З.; and make powder, and mix with honey from an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many men.
Another manner of poultice that is good for torsions: take mugwort and vervain, ana X З.; resin and aloes, ana IX З.; ivory VI З.; boil armenian powder X days, and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg, and administer.
Another way to plaster joints and the bones dislocated from their sockets, and alleviates the pain ensuing, and the damage from the bone, and the breaking: take new wool, and the marrow in oil cooked, and place it on the wound.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly removes pain.
Another way to plaster which heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and ground terrestrial potato leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for making a plaster to heal bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of abscesses. Take root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of cereals;
and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way to plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess hardens during the restoration of the limb. Take roots of visvalve, and seeds of flax, centaury, millefoil, and sweetwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one part; and grind them, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras stated in his book that one should not apply anything on the broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he said it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And Galen seems to say that one should apply on the broken limb things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mustard and hairs of shorn men, or feather tips of birds, and vinegar, and equal salt, and grind them, and make a poultice with it at the place.
Then remove the poultice after a while, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place. if you do not remove the poultice with clean hands. And if pain comes to that place, or itching, with no relief or swelling, then hasten, remove the poultice, and take off the plaster now.
and take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and dip it in water, and apply the area with it as long as the itching subsides, and the pain is relieved. then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry, moistened linen in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of the abscess being hot.
and let the inflammation subside in the limb, and let the pain be relieved, then resume the delicate binding, and a little plaster, and do not hold it so tightly as before. and delicately until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has become empty and redness and pain and swelling have all been removed, and you need to apply a plaster and bandage, then renew it as you did at first equally.
And if nothing from what we have said comes to the limb, then release it only after three or four or five or seven days. and let it be twenty days at least, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and brings close to the setting of the bone.
then restrain more than first, and it will fatten its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the head dry more than necessary, know that no growth can come; apply the hot sponge frequently when you release the tension, and let it rest for a little while.
by this means cut the growths on the limb, and quickly bind what the foolish surgeon does, which leaves the limb deformed:
it is bad, and it is an improper operation, and I see nothing else but to leave it and treat it properly.
Many kinds of fractures exist, with various forms, and their causes are predetermined.
because there are fractures caused by sword strikes, and the neck breaks completely through the bone down to the marrow, as done by a hammer or club. and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "hamewound".
or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute".
and these are the wounds from these two kinds of fractures, large or small.
And if there is a compressed percussion, or a fracture of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar ones.
And if there is a fracture close enough to the tissue beneath the bone, or upon the bone itself, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is embedded in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this, it is called "capillary" fracture.
and if the wound made by a fall, or a stone, or something similar, causes a piece of bone to come out, and the bones are displaced as blacksmiths do when they forge on cauldrons; if between the bones inside.
And this happens more to those with wet bones, such as children;
and happens in all manners of fracture where small pieces come out like splinters; and I will speak about it regarding its place.
And let us know all manner of breaks through their subtraction, and by examination with tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon them.
The appearance of the hair is known by this: when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, the black breaks become apparent.
In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient's condition. If you see any harmful symptoms such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, paralysis, fever, and the eyes becoming protruded and red, and other similar symptoms due to various conditions, it may not heal with doubt.
And if you do not see any alarming symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the pain comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the moon.
And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone becomes corrupt, and the accidents that we have said come about.
And if the fracture of the bone comes to the tissue that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part thus:
and it is that you probe the patient's wounded head, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and more over the figure of the wound than you can, and if blood flows when uncovering the bone, or abscesses form, then you provide the aid that is needed, and it is that you fill the place with wetted cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are appeased, and you are assured of no further flow of blood. then begin under the bone to extract, and this is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut with a narrow scalpel in front, and this is the form:
And then we cut another larger incision than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of blades diverse, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron.
and work lightly, so you do not burn the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, it must be pierced through, so that when you administer blades with ties, they do not pass completely through the bone beyond the skull, and should have a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone.
and it must be that you have more than one, so that each comes to its place in the thickness of the bone, and you have ties for all skulls.
and these are the forms of the three ways to treat:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place the cautery on the bone and turn it until you know that the bone is pierced.
then remove the cautery to another part a bit after, and do this all around. Then cut the space of the bone that is between the perforations more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, so that you can bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps.
and make sure that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the dislocation which has remained from the bone to any other instrument similar to an extractor, but it must be more tense and finer than the other extractor.
and if there remain nothing of the small bones or any scales, gently remove them with forceps; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galien says, which is simpler. and it must be very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break has opened wide, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this incisor a lens-like object, the form of which is as follows:
And do not cut from one side, and let the parts be wet on two sides, so that the cutter is opposite the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and be well aware of the membrane that is underneath;
if it is close to the bone, gently remove it, for removing it too much causes great pain and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must scrape beyond that roughness and remove the scales with a fine razor, in which you should have various quantities, to apply the most suitable part in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you start with large razors and then use finer ones, and continue until it is well done.
In each of the other small incisions and delicate fractures, you must proceed according to its nature;
and this is a matter that is not within the scope of one who has devoted their study to this art.
And if the syface is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and the wool in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and the wool in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so as not to weigh down the syface, then apply the lien over the other cloth, and do not tighten it too much so that it only presses on the wound.
and leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, flour of vitriol, incense powder, and aromatics, and similar things.
and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer with it adhesive medications without causing pain;
and ensure that the wound is thoroughly clean, neither leaving ointment nor allowing pus to form, for when pus forms on the brain cloth, it will flow and cause great harm to the patient.
for when you apply something piercing over the surface, be cautious. Therefore, take note, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt without doubt.
And if blackness comes only because of the medicine you have applied, and it has the desired virtue, then you should take one part honey, three parts olive oil, and in gum one cloth, and put this on the surface. then use the treatment of wounds as it should, until he is healed.
Both parts of the neck above are broken none the less, for they are two bones;
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, nor causes it to swell or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must place your little finger or joint from the neck in the break and align it with your index finger, placing it in the pouch to secure it, so that the neck regains its natural figure. and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is above the nose and your finger cannot reach the place, it is fitting that you put it equal to the end of a slightly thickened finger.
And if the fracture is in two parts, remake it on the other side, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
And if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have subsided, then apply to the head of the newborn flaxen cloths.
Or you apply it to the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the cloths be so large that they fill the openings of the newborn's head.
And any restorer says that we should moisten the tents with butter and change each day. It does not seem right to me, but they should be soaked in a preparation of egg yolk and flour. then let the bone harden, and the cartilage toughen.
And sometimes use goose quills in place of tents, and if at the mouth of the incision wrap it with a cloth, and hold the cautery, and blow on the patient from among them. or make as you see fit.
And if abscesses form on the nose while you are working on it, apply a cloth or a moist cotton pad in rose oil, or with a little iodine.
And if no abscess forms, apply an ointment externally with silk flour and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk, then place light stoppers on it and do not bind the nostril.
And if the break in the nostril is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with instruments suitable for this, then stitch the wound, and treat the flesh with appropriate ointments and plasters, binding as needed.
and if there is no wound within the nose, then clean the nasal cavity, and put in plasters until it heals.
When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound, and the break is open merely, not shattered into pieces, but rather cleft internally, one can recognize it lightly.
If the injury is on the right side, you should place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the injury is on the left mandible, you should place your index finger from the right hand into the injury gently, and fix it with the other hand from behind, and keep it steady.
And if the break in the jaw is separated into two parts, you should apply extensions to both parts, making them equal.
And if movements of the teeth occur or a fracture, strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a dressing on the broken jaw, and put a double layer of cloth over it. and place above the cloth a large well-made steel plate, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and attach it to the cheek as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
And if you see that the swelling changes, release it on the third day, and then reset what has changed. and apply a plaster over it, using powder from the mill with abundant egg or sinew flour, after you have removed the cloth.
and place over the plaster a light linen cloth. If the plaster dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it on until they are healed. many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses form, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of the bone has been displaced; so subtly with the extraction using instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flamed irons according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these fragments, and there remains none, close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters over it to promote healing until it is healed.
The shoulder breaks several times forward, and the fractures occur in three ways:
or it is broken and dislocated into two parts, with pieces missing, and this is the easiest to reset;
or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedure is as follows: when there is a fracture with a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken bone. and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then place the break evenly on both sides, so that the form be as it should, and there be no appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend more, place a round pad of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient, and make it as large as needed. and extend and lift the limb, hold the pad steady with your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as it should.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder downward, because it comes from the front, then it is necessary for the patient to lie often on his side, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and order the attendants to lower the shoulder, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
and then align the break with both sides, and if you find it displaced, you must cut into it.
and draw out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, leave it at one of the incisors that you have. but you place it out of the forceps, to guard the eye:
and it seems like a spoon, and is not misplaced, and let it be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and have two heads, as you can see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound you made when treating the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, incise the wound, and if the wound is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
And if an abscess is hot and swollen, I wrap it in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
The compression of the bone, when it is felt due to wounds and incisions, is that you apply a poultice of powder from the mill and egg yolk on the bone, and place light stoppers over it, and put a sphere underneath the pad if you need to. then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, and place the pad double over the stoppers, and apply the poultice. then take a strip of cloth three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang out. and place the strip over the burner, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy side, and underneath the affected side. and reduce each part, and when you see that the ligaments hold the break properly, and you clearly see that the bone does not move over the broken area, then reward it daily, and when the ligaments become lax, so restrain;
and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade to raise the shoulder. if the fracture of the scapula is realigned by adjusting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until no harmful accidents occur for twenty days.
then reapply the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and continue to restrain it until it is restored.
and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less time for some individuals.
of the breaking of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated at the joint, and one cannot determine it by touch alone.
if you reset it according to the fracture, and restore it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
then place on the joint powder from the mill with abundant egg, and light cloths, and cover with a double cloth. then place a wide and thin strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are movements anywhere on the strip, use linen bandages to secure it, so that the strip remains evenly secured.
and then hold it firmly with one large bandage so that the arm does not move from its place, and examine the wound each day;
and every time he reduces it, hold it firmly, and set the arm in its proper place if it is out of alignment, and have the patient lie on his side.
and the shoulder heals in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when these numbers are completed, release it, and be sure, because it is not bone that can be put out lightly.
And if a piece of the bone tends forward and out of the shoulder, cut it off, and do what we have said in breaking the collarbone to treat a hot abscess.
from breaking the foot
The skin is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely. but it often breaks when thrusting through.
And when it is broken in the middle, it bends outward, and the patient feels great pain, as well as swelling. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movement in the broken bones becomes obvious, and everyone can see it well.
And the restoration is such that if the patient lies often on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly and evenly adjust all manner as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then place plasters and stoppers above the fine salt layer or another light substance, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage roundly on the back, and hold it in place appropriately, and rewound each hour the bandage, and if it loosens, you hold it tight;
and if it is necessary to dislocate, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten, and dislocate it, and scrape the plaster, and treat what has come in a manner of treatments;
then reset the plaster, and restrain it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs occurs only in their thick parts behind the back and at the head within, and they do not fracture only because they are brittle. and one feels it well in the inquiry of the wound.
The resetting is that you align the break as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
And if the break of the ribs is turning inward, the patient feels great pain and puncture, similar to pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. and when pricked with needles, and immediately vomits great clots of blood, and this is a serious health issue, and the ancients have devised great skill for it.
And if some say that it is fitting to give foods that swell the belly to administer, to expel the burning sensation.
We do not make such incisions that abscesses form if they have not come. And if they have come, then heal them.
And they say that we put cups on the side to suck strongly, and it seems reasonable; in every way, there is doubt that the cup will draw the superfluities to the side due to the weakness of disposition.
And some say that we should cover the shoulder with wetted wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the duration equal, then it should be treated with a pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone where the membrane is torn, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to incise over the side of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place something underneath the instrument to guard against spillage.
and then one must cut the bone, and ligate lightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with poultices until it heals.
And if abscesses form, place moist cloths in rose oil, and apply to the area.
and treat the area as suitable for an abscess, and let it lie carefully on the side where it belongs until it heals.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know whether they will be healed or not, if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they can move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper treatment is applied.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, then take care to see if the parts are softened, and if the accidents are those in hands, and on the back with sudden windiness and emission without will.
And when one feels it in the abdomen, it brings sudden emission without will. And when it is treated on its back and it wishes to heal, it cannot. It is mortal: if it does not labor in its treatment.
And if this accident does not happen, it is the lighter thing.
And the treatment is that you apply oil rose or olive oil to the spine if there is a hot abscess, until it is soothed.
then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
and if any bone separates, it must be coped over the joint. and remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with ointment promoting healing until it is healed.
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the humerus," then hold your left hand's fist and place it equally in your right hand as far as you can, then apply the plaster and sling over it if needed.
then he holds it, and if there is bone dislocation, he cuts and removes the bone, and treats the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Often it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if this happens, there will be some relief in the head; and he cuts long and declines to the side of the pelvis, and brings pain to the patient at the site, swelling, and discoloration where broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the broken area; and know which is the break and its location.
and if the fracture is only in the head, set that fracture so it is in natural alignment.
And if the wound is long, or it declines inward, so lie the patient on their stomach, as the restoration of that wound matches you. And when you have set it in place, apply a plaster, then cover it with a strip of cloth or linen, and immobilize the fracture so that it does not move.
and place the shoulder between the ribs, so that it is in an even position. And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
And if abscesses form there, do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and apply what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and immobilize it as needed, if there is no further bad accident.
of the shoulder dislocation
The adjutoires are those between the cut and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, one must restore them according to one of the two manners.
of which one is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two heads with two threads, and pull them up, seating the patient on the seat;
then he places the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, and has in the middle of the stick a crosspiece of wood, then pulls up any heavy thing or the attendants extend downward;
then place the broken part evenly together with the patient's hands until the break returns as it should.
And another method is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two attendants that one hold what is on the breaker with their hands, and the other hold below the ligature, extending each to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, tighten the ligature below the breaker and above it, and extend each of the attendants to their part.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should place the middle of the ligament under the acromion, and the other part toward the blade, under the break;
and if the break is toward the blade, then you should place the ligament gently, without effort, until the break is even over the bone and the blade.
then set the break evenly as it should be, and hold it steady, if no abscesses come.
And if abscesses come, do not hold it steady for more than seven days, and place on it a moistened cloth in oil of roses until the abscesses subside.
then he must hold it in place, and the way to do so is to apply the plaster over the fracture, then position the arm on the splint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the side.
and place the bandage, and hold it in place on the splint and on the arm, so that the arm is in alignment, unless something prevents it or the bone has not shifted.
And if you doubt that the bone has not shifted, use a splint, and place a wider and stronger brace over the fracture, with two fingers' width between each brace. Let each brace be so large that it spans three fingers' width on each side.
then hold over the ribs, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breaker, stronger and less by pulling away.
And if you see the bottom of the ribs and the constriction, as we said before, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it remain tied for seven days, as we have said;
then examine the bond every three days, that neither itching nor swelling arise at the site, or that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow. If the remedy, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not untie it after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, and place his hands on his stomach.
and place over the shoulder joint a cushion full of even wool, and observe every hour by day or night whether the figure of the broken limb moves or whether the ligaments become softened.
if the treatment through the virtue of medicine, and then give the flesh that we have placed before, in such a manner that the flesh be over the first small bones; and when it begins to take hold, let it be strong.
And it is customary for the shoulder joint and the leg to be renewed every 40 days from then on. and then one must loosen and administer baths and ointment medications to treat the area.
And if the stricture is ugly and bound up, it must remain to be untied for one or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicule," of which one is small and is that which follows the pouch.
and the other is large, and it is that which is beneath, opposite the small one;
by chance the large fascicule may be broken alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small fascicule is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and more severe than when they are broken together.
If it is the small fragile bone that is broken only, then it needs to be gently extended and kept in alignment.
And if it is the large fascicule, it should be held more firmly;
and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient cross his legs over himself, and the cushion in front higher, so that the patient does not suffer any discomfort;
then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or at the wrist, and another minister above.
And then place the bones in alignment, according to their best form.
And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its proper place. And if there is any detached part that cannot be grasped and restored to its place, then make an incision and remove it, as we have said before.
And when using the blade for wounds, I have spoken of it in the chapter singularly; if you take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, which should neither be too hard nor too soft. and bind I the cloth gently, until the abscesses are calmed.
And then remove the dressing, and apply the plaster of the powder of the mill with abundant egg, then place the cloths, and let the cloth of the burner be stronger, and a bit larger than the others.
and know that it should have six cloths or braces in various positions: let the burner be in one of the bones, or two;
and hold it more closely above the burner than elsewhere, and always less by moving away, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the flax that is on the wick be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the flax that is on the wick be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the threads, from which it is spun, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itchiness that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you wash the limb with hot water until the itching is alleviated;
and let the limb rest not too tightly.
And then reapply the binding. If the ligaments have become soft and the bones displaced, address accordingly.
And if you notice that the wounds cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you loosen it a little and leave it for a few days, until the wounds heal, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things we have said happen to the patient, do not dislocate beyond twenty days.
or even more so, then place his hands on his neck, and let his shoulders be level, and guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back.
and know that this breaker is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and the complexes of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and near the knuckles, dislocations occur only rarely, but many times they become swollen.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient wear a splint and keep it straight in front of him equally;
then place his hand on the extended board, and have the attendant stretch the broken bones, and set the ends equal, until they are well aligned;
and apply the plaster and stops, if no abscesses come, then place a bandage according to the size of the wound. and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the blister is on the sole of the foot between the toes, make a sphere of lint, and instruct the patient to bind it to their injured sole; and then bind it with a long cloth, and make the poultice of sheep's wool as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it properly.
And if the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a pad above and one beneath in the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and secure the bandage between the two.
And if the blister comes to any of our fingers, if it is swollen, place it evenly, as it should be; and bind it with the sole of the foot, and if you wish, place a small poultice straight to raise the blister and keep it from moving.
and if the fracture is at the other elbow, as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and bind it with the healthy elbow that is next to it; or you bind them all together, ensuring they remain in place, or you put a splint on it, as one would do for a pouch.
and take care in the restoration and placement of a hot abscess, and assist those who come, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often fractured, and one can see this when it turns front and back.
and the restoration is done by binding above the fracture and below it. And the patient lies on their back, then each minister extends their hand to their respective part equally;
and this is when the fracture has gone through the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one ligature on the side of the knife, and the other ligatures below the break.
And likewise if it is near the knee, then the hands should be behind the knee, and the extensions downward;
and place the bone in its natural position with both hands, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, if no abscesses come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first before returning to your work and treatment. the wound is made in such a manner.
You must wrap the burn with a double cloth bandage in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the heels are at the root of the thigh, and place a long thread between the hip and the leg, down to below the knee, and let the end of the thread be on top.
then wrap the bandage around the leg and hip, then place a cloth over the burn, and put a cloth over the bone of the leg.
then place eight folds of soft cloth between the leg and hip to ensure even compression, then begin to wrap in a figure III or IV around the burn. and when you go further from the burn, the more it relaxes;
then attend to the two heads of the thread that you have inserted between the thigh and the hip, and to the three stakes above, then return to the top of the thread head, as long as you see from the side of the foot;
and hold it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there is no abscess or swelling or any other similar condition. and if there is, undo it and tie the one that has come about, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that need to be grasped, then it is necessary to wash them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the ligament and draw forth force; and the treatment as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken when we set it, as in the case of the shoulder and the arm;
in any case, after this restoration is made, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in about seven days, or somewhat fewer or somewhat more, according to the differences in constitution.
Know that in the groove of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it fractures, it is not merely a crack or hole, but results in all wounds and sore injuries, and one feels this well.
And the restoration is such that we put equal parts of the healthy tissue to its parts, until it moves as much as it can.
then apply the plaster, and place a round splint if you need one, and hold it in place as necessary. Then reset all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases. if you apply to each accident what it requires, until they are healed.
of the fracture of the leg
In the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile".
and is broken in the same way as it happens to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equally the same as that of the arm, and the operations are entirely the same. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
And if the finer bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is evident. and turn aside.
Then administer extension, and let it be even, and tie the straps equally;
but in all cases, if the fracture is ugly, and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be less and more gentle; and adjust according to its nature.
And when you have completed your work, take two bands of woven cloth that fit the leg from both sides, and let them be long from the leg down to the knee.
then wrap them with one band over and under, and tie them in the middle thus, and at this tying the leg cannot bend to the right nor to the left, and so it is well.
and none administer the brand of the long bone, and it is from wood, and one places the leg to guard against movement, and properly do this in the fracture where there is a wound;
and move the leg each day, to see if there is any new abscess or other accident; if the wound be healed.
of the break of the bones in the foot
At the ankle no breakage comes about, but in the bones of the foot there is sometimes a break and in the toes, and there does not arise strength beyond multiple dispositions.
And if there is a fracture of the bone in the foot, and you see these bones rising over one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to go, and now put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their proper places;
then apply the plaster and ointments on top, and place under the foot a small board for two shoulders full, then bind to the foot appropriately, and once you have wrapped it with cloths around, and other things you may need.
And when three days or four have passed, unbind the ligature, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be slightly wider. Then place under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and bind it appropriately;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and let it be placed on the head of the table downward over the abdomen of the foot, so that it touches well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said to the other breakers, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it requires.
of the breaking of the bone at the hand
When the bone of the woman's natural position is broken, make her sit extended, then incline her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind.
then fill the natural cavity of the patient with cotton, and put in as much as it can hold.
then release the woman, and gradually raise her back, and then the cotton will fall out as it reaches the entrance of the natural cavity, and the bone will return with the body.
and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, replace it, and thus for seven days or so. the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a bladder of birch, tie a string to the hole, and fill the entire bladder with the substance. then blow into the string to inflate it, until the bladder is swollen within. the fracture will return to its proper place.
then fill it with cloth, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the shoulder in the man or woman is broken, reset it thus as we have said for the hip bone.
and these fractures near to him who puts his study and use, and listens to my book, are not wholly hidden.
for the fractures signify through many dispositions the right way of restoration: understand it therefore.
In the thigh, when it is broken, take an owl's crop and insert the thigh into it; then wrap it with bandages around, and let it be for three days or more wrapped, and it will be quickly healed.
of break with wound
It is necessary for him who has a break with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be treated now, as our treatments testify.
And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart healing the injury at that same hour, or on that day, if no abscesses come.
And if no abscesses come, continue the healing until a new day, as long as the abscesses are appeased. Do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause harmful accidents.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered side, you must place it gently in position with your hands, maintaining a small extension.
And if the extension is not available for you to hold with your hands, reset it with an instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight long tines, and the width is according to the size of the wound. and for this, it is necessary for the physician to soak three or four, according to what he may need in each treatment of a broken bone;
and let it be round and a bit large, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be hard in front, and thick at the center forward.
And it is called "paleche," so it is necessary that curved plates be placed on the head of the prominent bone. and be applied once, so that it returns, and let them be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must shape the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, use a cutout piece of an appropriate instrument, or a probe or hook, to your ability.
then reset what is stuck in the bone due to hardness and small cracks.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
If you do so until it is in its place, then moisten the dressing with black lint, and properly if it is so. and do not place any ointment or other thing on the wound that it may cause putrefaction and corruption.
then administer plasters when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not compressed by the bandage.
and many times the foolhardy have done so, and have caused the patient to die or become rotten at least once. and let the compresses be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you suspect that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not fitting to place cloths on it; but envelop the area with hard bandages instead of cloths, and secure them.
And when you see after one or two days swelling in the wound, remove what you have put on for vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetropharmakon ointment and similar.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
And the limb must be aligned in such a manner that the swelling flows down lightly.
And if many days pass and the swelling does not subside, you should know that there are small pieces of bone. Therefore, you must clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the head, or any other kind of corruption, it must be treated, according to what he states in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or other similar large bones, do not treat it immediately, for often death ensues, but let it remain until it rots.
By chance, it may fall to him after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, let it be.
Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and a sight to behold is the appearance of the limb; and by chance it may not be able to make the limb perform its natural actions.
Therefore, take care that the fracture is fresh: if you administer medicinal plasters, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and dragon's blood, acacia, and other similar substances, so that you use any of these things, or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine, or with an abundance of egg, or with ointment; and place them on the nut in stoppers, and hold well, and do not release in hand for days;
and place them on the nut in stoppers, and hold well, and do not release in hand for days; and then reset it, and start another, until the knots are removed;
or hold well on a properly made piece of flax; for the properties of flax are such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the knot has already hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed, then scrape over it, and make the excess apparent; or have it scraped by any sharp tool until it is removed, and the wound until it is healed.
a limb that is weak after the siege
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate, of which one is because it was tied too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of too great movements, not at their proper time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and strengthen his body, until the blood increases in him. and give him a bath, and provide him joy and pleasure;
then apply a poultice to the limb, so that the poultice draws towards the large wound, and frequently moisten it with warm water, until the wound heals. and returns to its natural position.
of the member twisted after recovery When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, still it does not lose its natural function:
for one should not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken completely anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
and these operations are blamed, and great harms arise, and by chance death occurs.
toutefois, se les nodations et les tortures sont fraîches, il convient qu'ils soient arrosés d'eau chaude, ou que des herbes mollissantes soient cuites, comme feuilles de vismalette, et racines, et mellifolies, et semblables choses;
et on le fait plâtre mollificatif, comme d'yaquilon bien fait, et tu prends le muscillaige de vismalette, et la confites avec graisse de geline ou oil de sisam, et on en fait plâtre sur;
ou on prend figues grasses, et les broie avec farine de coton, et d'autres médicaments qui amincissent rapidement.
And sometimes the nodes are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And move the limb every hour.
Et se les tortueuses est envieillie et endurcie, comme pierre, et besoin est de l'ôter au fer, si la convient couper jusque à l'os, à l'incisoire subtile légèrement; and apply caution and study to the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its proper place, for which it cannot move freely, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, it is fitting now to reset it without delay.
and if one delays, the eyes will swell, and by chance if they are reset with force at the joint;
for it is not appropriate to move it while it is swollen: many times it brings about swelling and other pains;
in any case, when this occurs, make the patient lie down, then let them rest until the abscesses are all healed.
then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as treatment brings them to their proper place.
And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
Often it happens that the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocation on both sides occurs according to two methods: or they are slightly removed from their sockets and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang toward the ear, and stop the flow of saliva from his mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, wrapping his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it often returns to place through natural means.
And if it is complete and thorough, you must reset it quickly, without delay;
and in such a manner that the attendant holds the patient's head, and places his fingers or a bag from one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation in the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand must be held steady, to ensure equality;
and instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions. And you place the joint evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the bringing back is difficult, even if it is the two jaws together, then soak them in hot and oily water, gently resetting them.
nor forcefully try to bring it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well, then place a moist cloth in a dressing made of rose oil and wax, then secure it lightly with soft threads.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his head between two cushions, so that it does not move either to the right or to the left, nor tries to turn, but eat light food until the pains are gone, and tie up the jaws.
and let him eat lightly, and do not force his mouth open for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well tied up and healthy.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to place within an hour and are not entirely returned to their sockets, then fevers and chronic stiffness arise, and by chance there may be intestinal rupture, and by chance there may be pure vomiting.
And when you see this, then know that it is fatal. and often the one who has it dies within nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate downward along the continuation of the bone and is dislocated only once at the fracture, and one can feel this.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and extends his arms. and then press the head firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and the bandage, and hold it steady;
and the head which is near the cut cannot be reset; if it can be reset once, then you must set it in its place as we have said;
then apply the plaster and the bandage, hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
and thus the head of the shoulder is brought back when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated for no more than three manners:
of which one is that it is dislocated at the base of the neck. and the second is at the part of the hip. and by chance it is dislocated above, and this happens rarely.
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate within for the nerves.
and often it dislocates downward toward the neck, especially in those who have little flesh, for there it strikes quickly.
For those who have enough flesh, it leaps out through the skin, and returns through the skin.
And by chance it happens to some men through percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated for this reason.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And you will know the dislocation when it moves towards the armpit, and place a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. and you will find a hollow in the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit at the axilla, in the head of the shoulder, as if it were a pit. and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any manner.
and also, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly by touch;
and this manner of dislocation cannot be removed when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's limb upward, then places his hands under the armpit, and resets the joint with force toward the top. and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward, then places it under; it will come quickly.
and if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water. and the patient is administered soothing and comforting remedies, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be given;
then dress the patient's back, and place a piece of linen evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, underneath. Then position the limb so that the heel is on the piece of linen, and bind the shoulder blade properly, and draw the arm of the patient.
and bind the shoulder blade of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns now, and if you see that it needs to be reset in this manner:
and it is that you make present a person who is greater than the patient; and be straight facing the surgeon, and place the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the arm up, so that the patient's head hangs down. and others pull the hand of the patient downward toward the stomach. And if the patient is too light, he can carry something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is reset in another manner as well:
and it is that you insert the long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be placed as wide as a fist, and neither too large nor too thin. then place it under the patient, but let it have a cloth cushion on top, and the patient's head be positioned as long as the shaft.
then it should be stretched downward from the other side, and the joints will return to their place quickly.
and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: take one stick of two arm's length and four fingers wide, which has a hole round to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form:
then tie it over the stick with a cloth, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient.
and stretch your arm over the long stick, tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand. Then place your arm on a step of a ladder of the same width, and extend the hand downward, and leave the body hanging from the other side. the jointure comes back to its place now.
And when it is swollen, in whatever manner that may be, you must place under the armpit a pad of wool equal, then apply the poultice mixed with flour of mill, encens, and yolk of egg, over the entire shoulder and around it, then draw the bandage under the armpit properly, and turn it over the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
and it must eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;
and then eat more after 7 days or 10, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three puncture cauteries to it, as is described in the chapter on cautery.
and if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. and know that the joint will never be placed in its proper position.
Dislocations that are found in the buttocks, and the nipples, or behind, are caused by impact and stretching of the hands; and they are administered elsewhere.
and cure until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes cracks in the limb, and delays due to movement, the patient uses baths many times until those cracks heal and return to their original state.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at the point and returns to that point;
and is dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind; and the dislocation is not hidden, for it can be seen and felt clearly. and is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the sick side with the healthy side, you must clearly see it. And the joint is fixed, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it in the same way that abscesses come to a head and go away, for if abscesses were to come to a head and go away, it would be harmful to bring them back.
and by chance cannot be restored entirely to its place, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance it may lead to death.
And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you extend your hand with both hands. and his arms are spread out, and his hands are placed according to the contour, inside and outside, and keep the joint in its socket or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his face and presses with the root of the palm of the hand that is dislocated.
And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong stretching.
and it is that two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold it steady with two ministers, so that it does not move during the stretching;
then turn the arm in both directions, since you have wrapped it in a long and wide double cloth;
and when the eyes are placed at the joint to align it with the hand, use the thumb of one eye to soften the joint, then hold the joint in place until it returns to its proper position;
and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, hold the joint in position, and suspend the arm by the neck of the patient, and let it be for several days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly set in its place, untie the ligament and leave it;
and if you see that the joint is not set well, reapply the plaster and the ligament, and leave it so for some days until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if it feels sore after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved. or you place a fatty lamb tallow on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and apply or bathe with it. and when it sweats, rub the joint firmly, then put on a bandage, and then apply a bath; and do this two or three times until it is healed;
and if you see, put on warm moistened sheep's fat with butter, and apply it;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The shoulder of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more so than other joints. In all cases, you must reset it to its place quickly, immediately upon dislocation, just as the shoulder is swollen, or an abscess is hot.
And the reduction is that you place the affected hand on a table, extend the minister's hand, and put your palm equally over the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it returns.
In all cases, you must ensure that it is properly set; then place the back of the patient's hand on a table in extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, set the patient his back of his hand on the table, and the helper place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, apply plaster dressings to reduce the abscess and leave it so as to begin again.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains twisted.
and it does not harm the patient as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grip anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut, or the artery;
if there is no other way to grip except with the fire cautery, and by chance nothing else works.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is any stiffness, apply warm liquid grease and rub until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the center.
then place the two parts together and hold the dislocation in place until it returns to its position, then support the head of the arm and move it towards the part where it is disjointed.
and leave it for two days, and then set it in place on the second day;
and do not bind it, as we have said, and let the dislocation rest for a day, and move it, then bind it tightly.
and do this often until it is tight. If it becomes dislocated in the palm of the hand, do so as you did before until it is healed.
and do so likewise if it becomes dislocated in another place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no certain treatment, for death often follows the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations come suddenly without will, nor can they be held, and often a limb is softened, or both thighs or both arms or one.
And often the spine shifts in four parts;
that which shifts at the rear is called "gilbositez":
the treatment is that you realign it if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there be no treatment nor healing for it.
and that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say that it does not always bring great benefit.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the hardness that comes to the foreskin, there is no health;
and also that which comes directly to the two sides, and can only be cured by what properly comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient's pain extend to one side equally, and has swelling beneath him, so he does not swell.
then stick a poker into the shoulder in hard earth, and another at the foot, and tie a ligature beneath the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and two ministers know the lines, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two embers;
and let the embers be well closed as we have said, and the minister place his palms on the spine firmly until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board of three handbreadths long, place it under the wall, and if the patient is on their side, put the head of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and let the minister place his feet on the other head of the board, and press well until it returns to its place;
and if you see, do it to the joint that turns at the wrist. And when you stick two skewers into the head of the patient's arm from one side, and between each skewer, underneath and over, a palm-width of long spice;
and put perforations or the joint's socket through each skewer, and let the skewers be firmly embedded in the ground so they do not move.
and between each pair of skewers put a turning skewer on which the threads turn, and place two short skewers a palm-width long in the middle to turn the joint.
and then tie the thread that is between the grooves to the joint on the outside of the head, and the other thread to the joint on the inside of the legs. Each minister turns their joint with the entire thread, and the master places the needle evenly as we have said.
And when they are even, place a desiccative plaster with abundant egg, then the stops, and then the strip of a tablecloth three fingers long, which penetrates the source of morbidity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligature as we have said, and use the patient for subtle drainage until he is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the strip that we have mentioned above. and at any time when it is administered a piece of flax, and at another time the appearance in the lower spine of the back comes about, and take care that this be dislocation. and it is the bone that displaces, for which one must not have any presumption: by chance it could bring about death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only due to dislocations, not in the same way as other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: internally and behind, in front, and behind;
and more internally it tilts, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of a dislocation internally is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the injured knee is more open than the healthy one, and the injured leg cannot bend its knee at all. and it is the thigh which is swollen from a hot abscess, because the heads of the thigh bones come there.
And the sign of him to whom it happens is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs for him who is affected beforehand are that his leg will be swollen according to its development; in every way, do not bend the knee without pain, and if one tries to make it move, it cannot and retains its urine, and the groin swells, and when he goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens after are that he cannot spread his knee or bend it, and this leg is more twisted compared to the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is at the site beneath the ribs.
The treatment for this case of dislocation is that you realign it if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, and there is no need for further treatment. and it must not have presumption.
And for that which is a fresh dislocation, and this is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hasten to return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it may return to place, and has no need of further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or at the place where it is tied above the knee; and have another assistant hold his thighs in such a way that he can insert his hands under the armpits, then tie him firmly at the thigh. and also hold the head of the thigh;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common for four similitudes, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it must be treated for its similarity.
When dislocation is at the hip joint, you must hold the patient on their healthy side, then place the thigh above the root of the calf, and the upper part which is below the groin. Extend the ligature upwards towards the groin, and towards the femur;
then have another minister support the patient's arms, and grasp the thick part of the damaged thigh, and extend it downward firmly. if it returns to its place now;
and this way of dislocation is milder than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the bad foot be stretched about two fingers more than the other.
then let it hang from the top of a pole, and let two long branches be placed on the ground.
then command the minister to embrace the thigh from above, and have other ministers hanging with the patient, who embrace firmly the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, the patient lies down, as we have said in that which has gilbosfeit, and draws out the vein above the sick leg properly, and above the foot also;
then place two sticks of wood, one at the head and the other at the foot, then insert the stick between the legs of the patient in the form. and plant moist cloths between them, so that it does not stiffen the patient, then stretch each minister beside him, and place the head with the dislocation equally at his hand.
And if it returns, that is good.
And if not, put it on the table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said. and place the hot iron on the painful area above the sick limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the lower part, it is not appropriate to stretch the sick limb downwards or lift it off the ground; instead, it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated downwards, as we have said regarding the position on the two hips. and let it be on its face, and the limb stretched as we have said before, and you must press on the joint on the board. and it will be in place when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and secure with a bandage, so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then release it, and apply the plaster over it;
and if you see that they are equal, secure it as before, and let it rest for 3 days;
then release it, and let it go easily, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, outward, and behind.
and do not let it become dry at all.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not rest on the thigh, know that it has become dry.
And the restoration of all is that you instruct the patient to sit straight, and extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on yours.
then take their knee with your palms, and pull it between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee together. and then extend their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it rests lightly on the thigh.
and apply the plaster over it, and let the leg above the thigh dry, and bind them tightly together for three or four days, then release it.
and do not allow the patients to walk until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The ankle is sometimes injured, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and hangs below the part where it has dislocated:
The treatment is gentle, and one should gently extend it with the patient's hands when they are only anesthetized.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must seat the patient upright, and hold them with the attendants above the ankle.
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and beautifully push the foot upwards;
and do this twice as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot;
if it returns, that is well;
if not, repeat the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return this way, let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive one peg firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie bands around, so that the patient does not move the patient;
then have the ministers hold the thigh, and others extend the foot to his hands or to the place, and tie it above the heel. then extend each minister equally, and the pasles be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient down when extending.
then place the dislocated parts equally in the patient's hands, and others hold the healthy leg from above, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and stops on top, and compress firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch over the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight.
then let it remain for two or three days, and when the ligaments soften, then extract it;
then release it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to go for four days; and if he goes before the term is completed, it is not safety that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses chase away, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
Of the two When the shoulders are dislocated, they should be beautifully extended with effort, and this is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the spine or foot, it is necessary to seat the patient on a flat surface or on a chair completely upright, and place his foot on what protrudes from these joints, then press firmly on his foot until it returns.
and when it is equal and there is nothing protruding, place a shoulder stool under the sole of the foot, then extract firmly, and let it remain for three days, then release it. and let it rest until it is healed.
for wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one sees it trying to heal, often the patient dies.
if you are not overly presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not thoroughly compassionate and merciful but also not too bold;
and use at the beginning of things to alleviate hot abscesses, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now reset the limb in place, as the abscesses begin to heal.
and when the limb is set, administer things to calm the abscess hotly, and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments;
and if there is a dislocation with fracture, and broken bones, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for this is according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body.
