O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest in the science of medicine, and I have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations. And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, "surgery.
And because the work of hands is scarce in our region and entirely lost, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients of what their hands have performed. And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been abandoned.
It seems to me that I should vitalize them all together the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and their conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and their movement and veins moving and resting, and from where they issue.
And because Hippocrates said that words without work are little, and with work are much; and especially in the art of manual treatment.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously said, should beware lest he act wrongly and injure people.
such that I have wished many times those who undertake this science and commit themselves to it should be well versed in it and have experience.
For I have seen a fool who lanced an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries in her neck; for so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
And I have seen another fool who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; and he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
And I have seen another fool who took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the red-hot iron made a wound;
and the surgeons full of ignorance restrain the breaking at the wound with strong linen, and do not leave any plaster on the wound, and leave it thus completed.
and commands that he does not dislocate it at all;
and delays thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot rotted away.
I am called to come to him, and hasten to come to dislocate the leg; and when I hear him dislocated, he was calm and felt no pain.
But the corruption of the bone was already confirmed or the member, and he could not cure it.
and the corruption did not cease to go through the limb until the member was completely lost.
And apply another poultice which collapses the abscess and then inflame by the malignity of its virtue.
For an abscess, when it is pure melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron if it is not in a dry state where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many positions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you take care of it, so that the foolish ones cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your tools in hand and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to their salvation and be praised;
and leave the terrible diseases of grievous illness;
and remove your weapons from him who causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: Neither take ill the care of a bad disease, lest you be called mad.
I have discussed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and water medicament cauteries, and are ordered from the head down to the feet;
and the forms of the instruments, and the tools for the cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and it is about the chapters ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the shoulder to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
As we remember the work, it must be said about the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are the longest and subtlest science and the secrets replied to.
and many of the wise spoke about this and agreed with it.
and let them speak but little, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether of two complexions: it is to say complexion that is warm with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In a warm and dry complexion with matter, they debated and said that the fire cautery is great aid; and the other said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not useful for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be used to treat diseases that are already hot by heat or dryness;
and he who says that the fire cautery is useful for aiding diseases that are hot and dry which come upon men's bodies. For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it to be true through experience.
And in all cases, do not intervene unless it is someone who has proven its efficacy and knows through long experience the art of cauteries, the diversity of human constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, as well as the outcomes and duration of time.
of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in diseases that are cold and moist. And all the signs assembled and agreed with the cautery.
And know, son, that the fire cautery altogether with heat is part of wound treatment, and has a greater goodness than the cautery from burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and harm only comes to the limb that is burned, and does not hurt other limbs much.
Hot medicines spread from one part to another and cause diseases in the affected parts due to their heat. and sometimes they cure the patient.
The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no excess.
And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study I have devoted to the art, it is based on the truth of things;
And for this reason I excuse the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is hidden or fire, and its quality, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher states in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, sir, when the cauterizations should be performed, and they chose the times.
And I say that the fire cautery is suitable at all times, for the harms occurring are diminished by the aid of the cautery. and especially if the cautery is for pains urgent and necessary that cannot wait until a greater mischief arises in the limb.
And never think it, dear child, as fools do; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so;
and they say so; but it is not as they think, for a cautery is not medicine that changes the complexion or dries the humors that cause pain, and it acts more like medicine due to the speed of its effect, and by the virtue of its work and authority.
And it is possible that the disease comes once according to the patient's complexion and the location of the disease and its virtue;
and they are assembled in him the superfluities through the acquisition of meats and similar things, so if it is not cauterizations administered to him where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and the same pain will not return at all; but this happens rarely.
And few people understand for what reason cauterizations are called the last of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterizations are effective after medicine, and their intentions are false. Cauterizations are the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it is effective.
Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
The ancients said that cautery instruments of gold are more painful than iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and its high density;
and said that the blisters from cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it and found that it does occur in some people.
and gold cautery instruments are more painful than iron, as they said. And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it will soon cool down.
and if you heat it too much; if they do it with fire; and then there is sufficient impediment.
Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins should be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and in it there are two kinds which we make because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solvent medicine changing the chief three or four times, according to what the virtues and strength of the liquid and the custom of the patient can endure. and then apply the cautery to the patient.
And then place it across your hands, and put his hands on top of the stones.
after place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes. and when these two means come to pass, bleed from the armpit and heat the cautery called "olive," of which here is its form: And place it on the armpit dipped in ink, and do this by lowering and withdrawing your hand little by little, turning it. then withdraw your hand alone, and return to the armpit if you see bone slightly. and if you do not see it, reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
after take some thread, and place in wet and soft cotton inside, and put on the armpit, and let it be for three days.
after place a moist cloth on it in grease; and keep it there until the cauterization is removed; after apply the ointment called "tetrapharmacum" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges. and for this reason, it must be cleansed.
And it was said that the cautery must be left on until part of the bone is burned, and then the burnt portion of the bone is removed and cleaned.
And others say that the fire cautery should be applied long enough and pressed so firmly that it displaces the bone as wide as the ring that women wear in their noses, so that the fluids are moved out.
and the wound must remain long open; after that, one must treat and dress.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in all respects, except for those who have the means to fear;
and it seems to me that I should let it be.
for the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural dislocation, as we testify in other limbs.
and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first application of the cautery seems more soothing and less painful to me, and from that I work in this assembly for salvation.
When throughout the body there comes chronic pain that lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie" and purgatives of the head and eyes and ointments; and if we apply the fire cautery as we have said before, and it is ineffective. Take care that the head of the sick person is not of very cold nature, and that it is not too cold; then the cautery should be applied after that cautery a little as we have said above. After apply the cautery on each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said before, and apply the cautery or reset which is called "vasselz". and it is the place where one applies suction cups; lift your hand so that it does not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and the cautery for the horns should be finer than that used for the middle of the head, and this is the form:
for the fire cautery of the head When there is sudden pain in a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with purifying medicines, and other treatments for the diseases have been applied as mentioned in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help: then they make cautery marks according to two methods, namely of aqueous medicine and of fire.
The cautery of aqueous medicine is such that you boil a dose of ale, and remove the husk and the outer layer somewhat on two sides of the shoulder, and then apply the ale beneath the skin in the area where the pain resides.
and when it has cooled, apply it well and leave it in that manner for twelve hours. and then remove the dressing and apply a dose of garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days. then place on a cloth immersed in butter until the dressing comes off.
After the application of ointment until he is healed;
and if you see such as those of some burning medicines that I have written or in the seventh treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery with coal to form it:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a closed circle or it has but little curvature, and in the middle there is a small prominence;
and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly turn the fire lightly, so that the halves of the thickness of the heart are burned;
and withdraw your hand so that the artery is not burned, which is above, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
After apply cotton for soreness, put on the plaster for three days; then I put moist cotton in butter, and then apply the ointment to the plaster until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", do it at its tip, and be careful not to damage the artery in this headache which is not old.
of headache
When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization previously recommended by medicine and with iron is not sufficient, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot.
and thus mark over the bone a line of half a digit's length, and take away your hand once, and hold so that you do not compress the artery and do not come to the bone;
and beware of the mandible that moves when eating, and the nerves should look only to the move and that spasm does not arise in the patient, and beware of the running of blood from the artery when it is cut, or fear has a great effect on those who do not know, especially those who are not studied and inexperienced; and leave the work in progress;
but I will tell you how to staunch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, burn in the midst of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two knives; and this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
Of the pain in the ears due to cold
When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division have been applied, and the pains do not change, then heat the cautery called "poins," as described below:
After pricking all around the affected ear, or around both sides where the pain persists, and then move a bit upwards from the root of the ear, after you have marked the place. and have 8 points between each ear;
after the wound is healed.
Of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated with a cautery is not those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the sections on diseases.
and do not apply any cautery for symptoms that come from drying and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this symptom of torture that moves from phlegm, fluids, and purgatives, and if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one on the root of the ear, and the other slightly above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
and place the cautery on the healthy part that is open, and apply it to the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery there until the halves of the heart are burned;
and this is the form of the cautery:
And this is the likeness of the lancet we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle, and it should be that the knives are a bit larger;
after treating the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I apply four cauteries: Above the two horns of the head, and in the skull, and at the place where it is called "vaults" as we have previously said, and the last cautery above the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be cleaned as we have said before.
For litharge
For this illness, give the patient great and purifying pills for the brain;
after which scrape the back of the patient's head thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster described in the treatment of plasters on the occipital region.
and this is the way of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is healed thus, well done; and if it is not healed thus, make three cauteries down the back from the neck to the collar, with space between each cautery one doth large;
and treat the wound as with others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; and if the task is, two others above the two horns, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cautery called "olivare," as I have already said, be;
It must be that the head is cleansed of grease and of what we have said before;
after placing the patient's head, then make the fire cautery through the head and above each horn, and behind and three times over the spine of the neck;
and if you have more need of it, and the body is moist and the patient is in pain, and the disease is severe, then make four cauteries over the spine of the back; and let it be until the pain is gone, and remove your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and let the cautery called "olivare" be as we have said before;
of epilepsy
Lepentics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from weak medicine.
and if it is an infant who cannot bear the pain, then perform a gargling and chewing, frequently modifying the mixture with good meats;
after the king of the head in the middle, and I make the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and the fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, he should be cauterized as I said for those with paralysis and muscular weakness, on the spine and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner I said.
If the patient is injured, if you perform the fire cautery finely according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or corrupted moisture and thick humors are present, then use the fire cautery of such cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something whereby his brain may be cleansed, according to those things that were mentioned before in the division.
after the king of the patient's head; after make the ligature of well-made linen, as a circle, and put it around the head;
and the patient should sit cross-legged, and be well held from all sides;
after present the lintern, and value must be rubbed with old burberry butter; and heat it over fire carefully, so that the dough can be applied without suffering pain; after empty the circle from within through the hole, and let it cool;
and do this to the patient once each week with another good government, until he is healed.
If you see a fire cautery being made by making pricks all over the entire cautery.
this way of fire cautery moistens the brain greatly;
and then place soft cotton in butter and oil.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and let the patient drink something purifying the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat or take multiple baths on an empty stomach.
after, instruct him to turn his head, and apply the fire cautery through the hole, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is at both eyes together, or in one if the descent is in one.
and prepare all the cautery for all the veins and arteries beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it with a cloth as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incisions how to stop the bleeding;
and once done, cauterize or burn beneath the two rear bones.
and one sees that it is due to cold phlegmatic excesses, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the ailment descending on the eyes: I apply the cautery to the head, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries over the zygomatic bones; and if there is need for more, he should cauterize bleeding above the zygomatic bone with a small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not improve at all, then give the patient three noisette seeds to drink. after treating the head, and I apply a cautery or at the center of the olive-shaped cautery. and make two cauteries from the fire cautery called "clavilis" above the two shoulders, a little below the hairline;
and take care of the artery so you do not damage it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize with the cautery called "olivare". of which here is the form:
And if you see, make two cauteries above the shoulders as long as the shoulders are;
and do not leave the hand there until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
of the hair which points to the eye Sometimes the hair of the eyes turns white and pricks the eye, and in such cases one makes cauteries according to two methods: it is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then apply the patient in a sound condition; after which draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that be as much like the leaves of the laurel, and mark the beginnings of the hairs;
then place moist cotton in egg white and myrrh on the eye, then heat the cautery as is its form:
After applying the cautery to the face you have indicated a few and many times, so that the cheeks are well heated in their place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper removed, and the hairs raised around the circumference of the eye;
then remove your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then apply moistened cotton in butter until the scalding is removed; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if hairs come after this, and the paper becomes moistened, then reapply the cautery in the same place, as you did first.
and if the hairs are cut, cauterize them until the paper is lifted to its natural place and is even, and do not prick the hairs near the eye.
The cautery for burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make parchment in the shape of the bay leaf;
then take of French soap and of strong heat, of each one .Ð—. (assumed to be a unit of measurement), and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then apply it over the shape that you made like the bay leaf, and place it on the paper of the eyes. and if the disease is limited to one eye, one must open it, and if it affects both as well; and put moist cotton from an egg into the eye;
and the shoulder of the patient be in a good position and put your hand showing over the medicine, and press it gently with the egg each time the patient feels a tingling from the medicine, for they feel it as if from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine according to your discretion. And when the tingling has passed, lift the egg away, and reward him if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision. and if it is so, it is well.
If not, apply more medicine to the shoulder or where the medicine has not acted yet, until your actions are equal, and your eyes directed properly.
then place moist cotton soaked in butter until the pain subsides, after which treat the shoulder with ointment called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
And if you need to carefully watch over your work so that the medicine does not stick to their eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that shoulder which has become softened by the wet paper properly, as you did before. after treating it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are different in size and according to this, your constraints;
and the right way not be rejected to him who studies this art.
of the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head on your side; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or shift its position;
afterwards, place moist cotton from an egg or from the juice of pomegranate on the eye;
afterwards, heat the cautery which is divided:
and it is positioned on the head as formed like a swallow's tail feather, together with where the cautery will be.
if you see, let it be marked from one head to the other, and if you see, let it be also like a tent;
but in any case, what is positioned must be moved for your work.
afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, work on it, and drain from the bowel;
afterwards place the hot cautery on the part, and hold your hand at the spot above the eye, so that your hand does not cause harm; and place the cautery on the grease of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and do so if you need it, and let it be for three days;
after, place moist cotton in grease, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass and it is not healed, then place a watery corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Hear about fistula, and treat it. after, place in the opening one thin slice of cow's cheek meat: and they make it to the quantity of a pint of wine; and hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the melted wine does not run into its eye;
and it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient a moist cloth of egg white or wool:
the wine thus serves to heal the fistula and restores health marvelously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good. And if not, it must be treated with pertusin on the neck, and restore the fistula to the body of the neck according to what is proper for its own condition.
of cracks in lips Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
When the cure for these cracks, as we said in the divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery blade according to this form:
And put it quickly into those cracks until it reaches the wound;
afterwards, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye socket, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and rot and has become a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not profit much: then you must apply the fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron draws blood to the bottom of it, and beyond.
and do so once or twice after the treatment as we have said in the treatments, until it is healed;
and if it is treated thus, that is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the bone and remove the corrupted one, according to what you find in its chapter.
when the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it does not help, then put the patient's head in a healthy state. after heating the cautery, whose form will be described later in such a manner that you place a cane on the tooth.
and quickly insert the heated cautery into the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth.
after lifting your hand, resume the fire cautery according to your will;
after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and for the scabies, apply it for an hour and wash off.
And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is set firmly, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
of the pain of teeth
when pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it may be necessary to use the fire cautery according to two methods: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you heat butter from a cow, and the end of it in a iron or tin spoon; after take cotton and wrap it at the tip of a tent, and the grease of heated butter, and place it quickly on the aching tooth and hold until it is cooled;
and so often do it that its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see such soft wool and cotton in cold butter, and place them on the aching tooth, and place hot iron on it until the fire comes to the pain of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you make a canth of iron or lead, and let it be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
after heating the cautery, as the form will follow after, and place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is cooled;
do this often, for the pain will be removed that day or the next.
And it must be that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the urgency of that cautery, and then holds it firmly.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make the cautery on the shoulder part you want, and according to what you have the power to do;
and this is the form of the cane:
of the scrofulous swellings When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moistures, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with coals as follows: this is its form, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other part of the cautery.
and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or as needed, until it reaches the core of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days; and apply moist wool soaked in butter until the burning is relieved;
afterwards, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moisture overcomes the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with soluble medications.
after you cauterize at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, but do not burn the heart, just a little.
after you cauterize at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cauteries known as "clavile" be those we have the form of.
and treat it well as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and the disease of the pormon is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and is not drying up, and the disease is old, then cauterize twice on the forcele in their thighs. and for the other cautery at the anus between the mammary bones;
and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that is said before.
And if you see, cauterize by pricking the entire cautery called "poins," of which the form is described earlier in the disease of the ears.
and let the "poins" be pricked up to 30, or in between.
After the treatment of the eye as previously mentioned, let the cauterizations be three according to this form:
And because these cauterizations are lighter, for you make three together.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After, anoint the patient's back and sides. after, lift the kidney that is within the titillite on the side of your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two wires made of the metal called iron.
and cauterize the heart until it perceives pain to the core, and let the form of the cautery consist of four cauteries together.
and for this purpose, the cautery is made with one that has three wires, so the form of the cauterization consists of four cauteries.
and the wires follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three wires.
And adjust it on this first nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After, place the cautery with fine powder mixed with salt. after making the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little happens, then make a cautery over the thick part of the cautery clamp, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is cured.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach to such an extent that it disagrees with his constitution, and there is much catharr in him, and the usual methods of treatment are not effective, then the patient should be treated on his back, extend his legs and his arms. After this, make three cauteries over the heel according to the quantity of a pea, for each cautery half a clavile, and two cauteries above the two flanks such that the figure of the cauteries be at three angles and have space between one another so they do not join together when they become putrid.
and let the cauteries be so perfect that they penetrate the two parts of the knee, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see it necessary to cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach according to this form:
and he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding at the stomach i.point according to the quantity that you see fit. then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "poins".
After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forced out of its natural temperament by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in the sections, and if it does not benefit the patient, then the patient must be treated on his liver. and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the costal nerves of the abdomen come.
and there should be space between each cautery the size of a finger; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
and let it be burned only the halves of the heart, and let the patient lie straight on his back;
and if he cannot lie on his back, let him be supine and extend his legs, and raise his arms;
And if you wish to cauterize these from the flail blade, being subtle and skilled in the art, be sure not to burn all of the heart, for you would dry up the entire body; and it should not come to a boil, for the nerves are very sensitive there, and the heart to see.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
And when this treatment reaches the membranes, it must be that the patient is anesthetized at its head;
and then lance the arrow or abscess, and then heat the cautery which resembles fire, of which here is its form: And apply the cautery until the charcoals are burned through, and continue until the suppuration is completely gone;
after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed;
and it is not fitting to use any of this cautery except by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured many times.
Then he can boldly operate, and nevertheless, it seems to me that women value this.
For the cautery of pleuresin
The ancients said that one should make fire cauteries from roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner: take one root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, making it as thick and as long as your thumb. and the marrow in oil, and the imprint with fire, and cauterize with the fire cautery between the scapula and the neck, and two small cauteries a little downward in the part beneath the chin;
and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining a little backward; and one cautery between the buttocks, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the back below the buttock cautery which is between the shoulders;
and do not press much with your hand, but do it openly as in boiling water.
And it is said by some ancient author that no one uses the fire cautery in simulation of shaving, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it comes to the abscess. and when the pain is gone, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be cured.
from the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve at all, then they apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Of which there is a manner such that you make three cauteries, or four, aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver as we have said before;
and do not press your hand too much on the entire cautery, and let the patient often lie on his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and place the heart near the mouse, or where the arrows enter from the left side, and let the elevations be such that you position the heart according to the shape of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After letting the two burned nerves swell until the cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will have four.
And if you see, cautery the entire cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when it has gotten gangrene over a long time, and it is useful to change to another of the treatments previously mentioned.
The cautery does not work for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
When you cure it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit much, then you must make four cauteries around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus; and let the cauteries be close to the spot of the nerve.
After let the cautery open to drain pus long enough, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be combined with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be as shown in the one we have depicted before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as described earlier.
When the feet are swollen in those who are hydroptic and are full of yellow bile, you must cautery on the back of the foot between the auricular and the annular. and hold your hand with the fire cautery without removing it.
And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn to a golden color, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
after make on each leg two cauteries at the tip of the knife edge; and let the cauteries be long, one above the knee in front and the other below, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries on for a long time without treating them, until the pain subsides;
after the treatment of other wounds as we have said.
when the fluid from the belly comes from cold and moisture, since the retained and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are impaired and cannot be treated by means of wounds. and you see the patient in great pain and with strong virtues, make the large cautery on the stomach as he spoke about it before or stomach cautery, in the circulation of the cautery; and four smaller cauterizations between the mouth and subtly around each stomach cautery, two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the hand, and one cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
for the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are external or internal, and are old and are large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in the divisions, and if it does not benefit, make cauterizations: Three cauterizations on the spine of the back, one which is just above the ilium gradually moving in a triangular manner, and two cauterizations below the mouth.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and one sees swelling of the fat, then apply a large cautery to the stomach, as it was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen for all the cautery clavile; and let the cautery remain long enough. After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is healed.
When you cut the artery, heat the cautery to appear as red hot, and then place it fully burning over the artery cut. and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, from which the blood stops.
do this one or two times, and if there is much artery, cautery each one as we have said. after the application of ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure a cut or opening, as we will recount in its place, there comes an illness that cannot be cured except by fire cautery.
When there is any coming fistula, and is envenomed and cast forth by corrupt pus and moisture, you must prove it with a whole thin tent, and keep that you know of the whole tent how much it has of depth.
heat the cautery until it seems red, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the pus has entered, and reapply the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned, one time, or two or three times, according to the quantity needed.
and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these areas, and do not make it further than the fatty tissue, and think that it is not dangerous.
after the treatment of the wound until it is healed, and if the eyes are inflamed, and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the eyes are completely healed;
and if the materials have not been removed, know that the eyes are swollen, and the bone is corrupted inside; and as with those we will say in their place.
When pain from cold comes with great wind and does not take hold of a woman, then you must apply a cautery to the sides of the ribs on both sides using the clavile cautery as we have already mentioned.
and if we apply the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
from the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder, where the hairs begin around the knife, both on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be long as one inch of our finger.
and make the cautery below the spine, or two inches if you need to.
and let the cauteries be claw-like according to the form previously described.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends mature slowly. and when they come, there is great pain. Then it must be that you make three cauteries on the buttocks, as we have said, or the bladder cautery, and two behind the back.
and let the cauteries be on the elbow, as we have said.
When the viscous moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place; the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and find the lymph of the region of the hip joint, and it must be that you cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and bleed before the lymph near the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle.
and if the cautery be such as those from which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if you do not have such cauteries at hand, make three large cautery irons of olive oil, and let the cautery irons be as well polished as all the others;
and let it heal until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip socket, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors using foul-tasting pills or other good pills similar. After you perform the fire cautery;
and the way of the cautery is according to two methods: it is to know together with burning medicines, and the fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form, and do them with good depth and large size, and have the space between each cautery the width of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
sometimes the cauterization is done in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, cauterize at the cautery of the circle that we have already described before concerning the dislocation of the hip;
but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the parts of the knee be well cauterized.
And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is felt, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side a bit.
and let the cauterizations be with a lancet, and burn the thickness of the knee.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two inches or near the foot, cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four cauterizations called "poins". And if the work is such, that he does more;
And if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, he should perform a cautery with a cutellar or circular cautery. And in all your cauteries, be sure that you do not leave the cautery on for too long so as to burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
And I myself have seen many who cauterized on the ankle of the foot and left it on too long so that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were perforated and corrupted. After an abdominal solution from which he died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, cauterize in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise men said about the cautery for the hip, in this manner: make the iron such that it is at the head as thick as a nail's head, or a little less, and be interlaced, and let it extend from one interlace to another distance of an inch.
and let the clamps be over two parts, and be also like nuts, and have one iron hand well made;
and this is the form:
And be heated until it is completely red and cast shadows, and then place it on the socket of the diseased hip, and turn it to the healthy side;
and let the cautery be applied once the cautery redness subsides and leave it for three days; and then apply a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of fear of its strength, and few of us use it.
and whenever this is of good cautery, who can bear it, and leaves where it attaches.
The cautery for burning medicine is such that you make the instrument of iron or copper, shaped like a crochet, through which passes the wick of the lamp, and it should be long, and be two fingers in height, with each one having the thickness of a thumb. and be open at the top and above, and join together according to this form:
After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side, press your hand firmly on the hip box. after pouring between the two circles of the hot awe for a short while heated on fire, let the patient remain one hour or so, and allow the patient to endure the heat and the burning.
For there is found both bite and burn;
and when the bite has passed, withdraw your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it so for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the scalding is removed; and leave it for three days until putrefaction subsides;
and this would be the last aid after the application of ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that touches awe according to what you have done for the hip equally;
and this is the way of the hot awe, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take alkali and live lime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. or there be a small hole punctured so that the point of a razor may enter;
or there be a small hole punctured so that the point of a razor may enter; and place another pot well weighted on top, and put alkali and charcoal and gentle awe on top, until there be two of them above the powders as you have sifted them well by hand.
and leave it thus until the hot and cold awe and water have descended or the weighted pot has settled, then take all that awe, and pour it on charcoal and alkali as before.
And then it will become very watery and is administered through degrees of medicinal work and other members' cauteries.
Because it makes great work like fire, and with other medicines where one cauterizes well the thigh as with honey, anacardium, myrrh, and wax mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where a noble was treated for pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and the great master, and he says that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured at one time when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
And it is said in such a manner that you take fresh and dry verdigris, and grind it very much with a little grease, and put it on the thigh and on the calf and on the leg where the pain is felt, and cover it;
and he leaves it for three hours and by the amount that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then let him enter a bath until the body is somewhat warmed, and put him to bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be cured.
And know that no one should use such a fire cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheeps' fat, it helps much;
and the cautery should be made in such a manner. Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the groove between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
After taking dry sheep's fat, apply it to fire until it becomes hot coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is cool.
and repeat in this manner, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and that the pain has ceased.
and this manner of cauterization is called "sheep cautery.
of the pain from the back
When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these cases are suitable for cautery, though it may be useful for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It must be that the patient is free of foul pills or other similar things, and upon their back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
and the cauteries should be done according to the cautery called "poins".
and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavicle according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight girdle when they arise, and fear. and you find at the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and find it needs to be treated, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form. So that the cauterization for each part of the spine is equal.
And if you see, cauterize between the spines with a sharp fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
After the wound of the leg is healed as we have said, and ensure that you do not apply a fire cautery in gangrene which is in the spasm of a nerve.
of joint pain
And when joint pains are due to moistures spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctors call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medical treatments cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery in such a manner:
make many fire cautery marks around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
And if there is need to prick at the sole of the foot, and it is cauterized with the entire cautery we call "point". And when the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make fire cautery marks on each knee III or IV in each part, using olive oil for the cautery;
and if you have need of more, make more, but not to keep your hand away that long as the fibers of the heart are burned.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks around the wrist two lines;
and if there remains any pain in the thumb, make pricks at each joint and above the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come just to the elbows or just to the shoulders, cautery each part, and give good governance to the patient and careful medicines.
For if you give it good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
When rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs, and this is newly occurred, then it is necessary that when you see them incised, he does not eat that day. and when he uses things that cause the wind to descend from his belly, so that the fumes descend from his belly;
after the fat is seated on his back between your hands, and you command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, then let them subside with your fingers, and mark with ink over the break above the bone of the hand, and make sure that all marks are similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery coal as follows:
until it is white and emits scents. then let the boils subside at their own pace; and the minister holds his hand so that it does not return back;
and work well on the thighs of the patient, and place a cushion and a mat over the thighs, and another over the foot that hurts his hands;
then place the cautery on the mark at all your fingers, and keep them straight and hold them until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat again until you come to the bone; and carefully ensure that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; and do not burn it; and that the patient does not die from it, or other evils.
And know that when you cannot reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work amounts to nothing.
And it must be that the cauterizes for children are fine according to the measure of their eyes, and those for adults as large according to their measure;
after three days cure the head of the fire cautery with butter until the scalding is removed;
after the application of other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound heals well;
and it must be that their bandages are left long enough, so that the poultices do not come out when they go into rooms.
and after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage, and let it be for ten more days;
and have good rest, that he labor little and guard against too great fullness from drinking and eating, and from shouting too loud.
and when he follows this instruction, he is completely healed.
And I will say after the treatment to cut in his chapter.
When ruptures come to other wounds and are known, and you see that they do not increase, then let the fire cautery be applied as many times as its quantity requires, and let it be burned for a third of the wound; after the treatment as we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this form:
but mark the head of the cord first and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand through all the cautery.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more soothing.
of pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, due to falling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauteries should be applied according to the length of the limb and its size, strength, and virtue, as well as its location of twists and its pain.
if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good;
if this does not work, restart with another cautery on that one, because it is custom that they change in the limb that is nearest, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The enchantments are sometimes aided by the fire cautery through great assistance, especially for diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cannot you see the cautery, take care that the disease is in the beginning, and that it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither worsens nor stays, and if you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: I apply it to the head nine times, and the other nine times towards the front at the end of the hair. and on the second over the two horns, and the one behind on the haunch;
and let your hand remain until the cauteries come just to the bone, and until the bark is removed so that the vapors of the excess humors can escape;
and cauterize over the mouse according to what is described before.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly ineffective, then you must cauterize with these cauteries as we have said or chief, and one on the nose, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the shoulder blade and another on each side, and two on the two shoulders; and two over the shins, and two over the tendons of the foot, one over each joint of the hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are over the back of the heel, so you do not burn them;
and once the fire cautery is done on the bone of the hand, one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more fire cauteries you perform, the more help you provide, and they profit from it;
And know that the patients do not feel pain from the fire cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you may find in manners of iron.
After the cure, let the head of flour with honey and other cures until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
and let the cauterizations be a little inside the thickness of the keur; then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
And sometimes one cauterizes and at the hand and with the foot and at the back, at the end of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
and in any case, no one should intervene unless they know the limbs and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and the means of medicine are of no use, then cauterize with a slightly hot cautery, according to the thickness of the pustule, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
then treat with a cure of flour of vervain and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from coltsfoot and blood from almond, each in part. and mix all together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
the cure for a chancre by cauterization
When a chancre begins to appear, and you see it stop, cauterize with a circular cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
And altogether the surgeons said that one should cauterize also at the middle of the ulcer.
and in every way it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it might become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen more than once.
and more improper is that it be cauterized between, in the cautery called "circule," as we have said when discussing cauteries.
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death due to the excess it produces or due to the age of the patient (that is, too old), and he has little blood, or due to the tension; and you see it hasten its death: then cauterize between many small cauteries in pricking. after let them grow thus. She will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through with the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from above in such a manner that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a corruption of the limb, for it eats away the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this illness in a patient who can tolerate fire altogether, then heat the cautery irons very small and large, according to what is suitable for the body or where the illness is;
after cauterize from all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, and let nothing of it remain, that everything which is corrupted be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and apply soothing broths with oil until the scarring from the fire is removed, and all the corruption.
After the application of ointments causing charring.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good;
and if not, then restart the cauterization on what remains discolored due to corruption.
And this mixture has sometimes been cured with medicinal water instead of the fire cautery;
but nevertheless, the fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already spoken of the treatment with medicinal water in the division: take the quantity you need.
of the warts that come on the feet Many times it happens that on the feet, from burns, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, hard lump that causes pain in the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, the fire cautery, and the hot water cautery.
The fire cautery is when you heat the cautery tip as if it were a vault pen, and it should be made of good iron to hold the nail in place from all sides, and there should be fine edges;
after that, place it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail; and let him remain thus for three days until the corruption begins to fester; then apply a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the ulcer will close and be rooted out from its roots.
Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if they have been converted by fire in the body, and this happens many times in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to it. and it is in such a manner: take a needle of iron or a quill of a viper, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is to say, for removing warts. and place the cane around where it bleeds entirely, then put a bit of hot awn, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning such that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot fluid deep way until the root;
and let the patient endure a bit the hot cautery for an hour; and leave it thus, and it will wither away from all its roots.
So do this one after another, until you cleanse all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that produce flesh.
When some tremble from cold or from nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four or four fire cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. and for the cautery or pox, and above the stomach with the olive cautery;
it will cause trembling, and hasten the recovery of the health of the cold disease.
Sometimes apparent by distillation from the body bathed, or foul pustules from large corrupted matter.
it is necessary at first, when they appear, to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle wood of myrtle cautery, where the point is heated by fire, or of the root of wormwood longispica, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery should be applied at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they do not continue to grow from then on, but the excess that causes them is relieved, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
many times there are great bleeding episodes from the artery that is cut during the wound, or in incising an abscess, or with the fire cautery on the member, and similar things. and it is most grievous to smell.
And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the bleeding ceases beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
then heat the olive fire irons, both small and large, until they are all red-hot.
then apply me, whether great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and place the cautery at that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is thoroughly coagulated.
And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are hot, so take the other cautery quickly which is on the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is thoroughly coagulated;
and watch that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot coagulate it well by itself when the artery is large, unless it is one of the four ways that we have said: or by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicaments placed there that have the power to draw out blood; and let it be tied and held until it heals.
Who will treat a stench from lint closely with cloths or put burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then it should not.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no mirror or medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound from the vein as we have said, and extend it well above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it much, but frequently rub it with cold oil that is very cold until the blood is frozen and collected and drawn out.
and make incisions in front of the parts that need cauterization and medicaments.
We have told you in the first chapter where it is necessary to use the fire cautery or one of burning medicines, and the application and causes and instruments and forms of the cautery;
and I have placed that chapter from the hand to the foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way because one finds it more easily thus.
And since I begin this one, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on fire cauteries, and for this reason, it is necessary to be greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; or there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to undertake folly. For many people come for treatment in various ways. if coming from such who fell so ill that they died lightly due to the fortuity of their illness and the greatness of their wickedness; and from these one must have fear.
And of these I will give you my sense, and say: wait, I am cured"; and the illness is sudden.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you and have this manner, but put more careful thought into your honor than into your greed, and do not rashly give of what you are uncertain, and from which you cannot take back.
and use prognosis and indication in treating your patients for whose health may be converted.
and this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Dear dear son, May our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing it section by section, as I discussed the chapter on fire cautery from the head to the feet, because you will find it easier to understand what you need.
Know that this illness comes most often to infants at birth, and when the birth attendants hold too tightly the head of the infant.
and sometimes it comes from a cause that is not known.
And I have never seen this illness occur except in infants, and among those I have observed, many died quickly. And because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the work in partial treatment.
And I saw the child of whom the shoulders were full of fluid, and the head was growing obese each day to the point it could no longer bear it.
and the moisture was so great that he died, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone at the syphilis site, between the heart and the bone.
and the operations are such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a wide incision through the head.
and let it be as long as two of us, while the moisture flows.
and see to the form of the splatumile:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the open corners of the head of each part, and the sharp pain springs forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not alleviate for you: then you must cut through the head [of the shoulder] with three cuts according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture out. After dressing the cuts with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days;
then release it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head heal gradually. Then allow the patient to eat dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look for where the abscess is largest, and the collection of pus;
for it never occurs in front; never behind; never on the right side; and never on the left side.
Cut therefore the skin where the abscess is largest, and the collection of pus, and make a hole according to what you can do;
and be sure not to cut the artery; and let the blood flow freely, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When a person has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the pus, and the illness is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is the cautery with those on which they will cut the two arteries.
Therefore, when you need to operate, the patient must turn their head; after rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then tie the patient's neck with the cloth; then look where the vein is located, and the arteries are behind the ears, and they are small.
then mark the arteries with ink, then cut both of them with a sharp spatule from two sides, as far as the vein size reaches the bone, and this should be done near the base of the head.
And if you see, place the spatillum over the artery and cut above, cutting as twice the width traversely.
And when the vein is cut, let it gush out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open upon feeling, you must measure the size of three coins, then mark with ink and cut until the bone.
and what must be put out of the blood is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery;
then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone a sign of suppuration, and the abscess has not yet come to head, then incise the wound and ligate it, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Of emigration When old emigration comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient sore eyes and similar things, and these are treated with methods of medicine cures, yet none of this benefits them, then extract the arteries in the temples and use cautery, as we have recounted.
And the method for extracting them is that the patient should feel behind his temples, and locate the artery that appears in the temple, for it appears well through its pulsation, and is less responsive to external stimuli in very cold individuals.
and if it is applied, draw the patient's neck with some threads, then rub the skin with a rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the arteries are clearly visible. then take the spatula of copper that is in the form: then scarify the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up with forceps, and carefully separate the threads that are beneath each part.
and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the bistoury, then cut from that part according to the size of the two shoulder blades. For if it is not cut, it will never heal completely.
and draw blood from six places, until three.
and if the artery is large, you must tie it off with two loops of a strong double silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the sudden onset of the wound, and to prevent excessive bleeding.
then cut away the excess flesh between the two loops at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, apply a cautery with the surgical cautery up to the bone until the shoulders are cut.
and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and he has a warm complexion. For the cautery is used to finish off any moisture: for it is of greater help in dealing with moisture.
For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the shoulder with old cotton and place it over well-made pads;
and when one releases them, it should be cleansed with dry medicinal substances that promote healing, and covered with pads until it is healed;
and if without cutting the artery as you work, you should hasten to cauterize it, or fill the shoulder with vitriol and squeeze it with your hand until the wound is sealed. and if you do not have that, place cold water over the shoulder until the wound is cooled, and remove the shoulder from cold water as long as the wound remains cold, and hold it steady as necessary.
And it should have between the two knives a thickness of good width, and when you have signed to join the two ends, then place the hot iron on until it comes just to the bone, and clamp the vein in two pieces. and keep them apart between the two heads because they are not completely joined by this cautery from end to end.
and this is the form of the cautery:
and he who is more heated and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein from two parts with the sharp edge, but let the edges be well thick to hold longer their heat. For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less heat.
of tears When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the temple, and no medical treatment helps, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel a tremor on the forehead as if from shivering. and when they are held and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall out, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, it has need of this treatment. And the ancients called it "bruised treatment," and you should do this for the patient who has this disease: make three cuts or marks evenly on his forehead according to its length.
And the ancients called it "bruised treatment," and you should do this for the patient who has this disease: make three cuts or marks evenly on his forehead according to its length. and let one of the cuts be as deep as the other two throughout the forehead, flowing down to the neck. The others should be on the sides above the papers, and take care not to incise the arteries that are above the ribs.
and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and let each wound be the size of three pennies placed side by side.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe the blood, then apply the sharp spatula from two sides as described here.
from the incision which is down to the second incision; and cauterize all the heart that is between the two grooves with hot coals from under the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then withdraw this spatula. If you place the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision, and it is very sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other, this is its form:
And place the blade cutting towards the buttock side of the heart, and the notched edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision.
And clamp all the vessels that descend to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that open into the heart, then do the same from the middle groove to the other groove.
and then extract the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood drawn;
then place a piece of old cloth in each crack, and cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and grease, and keep the abscesses from forming.
and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply great plasters of hot water, then treat with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
When someone frequently comes with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes red and small, and weakening of vision, and burned papers; and the hair grows, and where the head hurts with acute pain, the patient sneezes; then know from these accidents that those materials and the cathartic come forth only from many veins, and what is secreted, this is it.
And you should instruct the patient to turn their head back, then make a great incision through the forehead, and another of lesser width. And begin from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then pack between the two edges of the cut and put in old cotton, and insert a linen strip; then bind above with moist cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with excoriative substances to promote fleshing.
In a similar manner: take 2 parts of flour of wheat, and 4 parts of colocynth, and make a paste; and apply it to the wounds to promote fleshing throughout.
Of the stoppers of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grain, or beast, or mineral stone, or similar thing. or seed, like beans, peas, lentils; or fluid-like substance like water and fat, and similar things.
When it falls into the ear a stone or some other kind of thing that does not stick to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, if it exudes any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with the extraction. and make the patient sneeze by sniffing condisi, and plug the nostrils with ointment when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear. and plug the ear from above.
Many times comes pus through this treatment;
and if it does not come through pus, the extraction with subtle forceps is administered, of which this is the form:
If it comes through with the forceps, that is good;
and if not, the extraction is administered with the fine forceps of small size;
and if it does not come through these, make an ear cane and insert the end of the cane or a hole from the ear firmly, and plug around the cane with soft wax so that the pus cannot enter with the cane; then let the treatment form, for many times it comes to pass as we have said;
and if it does not come to pass in some manner, take glutinous substance and apply the pincers, and place any instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton between; then press the glutinous substance on the stone or whatever it is, and pull out forcefully.
And if it does not come out forcefully with all these things we have said, hasten to incise the ear as one would an abscess filled with pus and foul matter.
and the method of incision is that you first anesthetize the patient with a compound from the head, and extract the blood according to its measure of virtue. Then seat the patient in your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends. and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
and the treatment until he is healed.
And if it is a grain that is enclosed and inflamed, administer the extraction.
and if it cannot come out, administer the spatule with a thin edge according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces.
then extract it with thin forceps and suck it, as we have said, so that the extraction be gentle.
In the ear wax that falls into the ear, the patient should use nose blowing as a first aid measure, and clean the ear with old cotton. And let the patient lie on that same ear where the wax is. If it comes out forcefully through that, it is good.
If not, take many stones according to the length of your strong and light hand, and heat them slightly on fire; and place one or two from his ear on it, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to strike stone on stone until the heat is all gone, and then it will cool completely.
and if you see, take juniper, and place one of the shoulders in the ear, and the other shoulder near the fire until the softer juniper is burned.
then do the same with another juniper until the heat is all gone, as we have said regarding the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is of large size that can be felt, use the forceps for extraction; and this is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillation, and if the treatment does not help, you must examine the ear with the sun. if there are no worms apparent, use fine forceps to extract them, and if they do not appear, take the wire of the form.
And it is narrow inside and wide outside. And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the amount of pain of the patient, then proceed further along the entire canal; Do this often until all the worms emerge.
And if they do not obey to come out, stuff the canal with cotton as I have said in the case of the stone.
And if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the incision of worms, and you will find them treated in the section on distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which the form is as you see: And let it be made of thin silver or tin below the small openings and above the spout for distillation.
And for pressing within the distillation, use an well-made tin instrument. If you prefer, take a razor and wrap the tip with appropriate cotton. Then pour in your oil or juice, and the medicine you wish from the tube, and the tube be in the ear.
Then pour the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or movement in the ear ceases. And let the patient sense it internally, and let the distillations be slightly heated on fire as when we distill in the ear. and keep it from being too cold, for the remedy would not be so good.
Of the stoppers of the ears
No child is born who has no perforations in the ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to wound blockage or flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages can sometimes be removed from the ear if one cannot see them.
and sometimes it is possible to open the perforation and see it well.
That which can sometimes be removed from the ear if one cannot see it, is a cause for great concern in many respects, and in such cases, you should place the patient's ear in the sun. and look within: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this spatumile of oil that is its form:
And be sharp and cutting both front and back completely, so that it does not damage the ear;
if the operation is on flesh born or a tumor of the ear, use fine forceps, and gently scrape it, until all the flesh is removed.
And if the operation is perfected in the ear, take a fine sharp razor and heat it slightly on fire, then place it on the earlobe.
If you feel the operation where the patient complains of hearing damage, puncture lightly, and make sure you do not damage the nerves of the ear;
then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and fill it with Egyptian ointment. Do this on any day while the wound is healing, or take a tent and grease in rose-colored water, and powder on ground vitriol;
and if you see the ear swollen, it is fitting that you apply the tent and move another greased tent made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and bandage in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other dressings that stop the bleeding which are or to treat distillations.
This is the method for eyelashes that come from papers when they are moist and then dry. You should extend them with forceps and tweezers, and place a spatulum made of their roots; then apply it over the eye with ground vitriol.
And if without scraping, cauterize with the thin lens cautery, and the cauterizer after incision moves.
and many times sprout, for no root remains from their bases; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the gravel Many times on the eyelids appear certain things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "hail," and it is a collection of moisture large within the skin above and below. The operations are such:
The operations are such: take heed of the one who is mute on both sides, and this is a light matter to know;
cut it open widely, then brand each part lightly, then take it with forceps, and clamp it.
if you cannot clamp it without piercing a little the paper, then do not harm the patient;
and if the wound is large, suture it up, and treat it until it heals;
and if it is small, do notç¼åˆ,å› ä¸ºè¯è†ä¼šå¾ˆå¿«æ²»æ„ˆå®ƒå¹¶ç”Ÿæˆè‚‰èŠ½ã€‚
and if the shoulder is dislocated inside the ear toward the upper part, expose the paper, and hold the shoulder with forceps, and clamp and press it from both sides.
and if the paper is removed by the incision, it matters not;
and when the boil is incised, wash the eye with salt water, and treat the head with what flows from it until the patient recovers.
of the fat from the eyes Exinach is a fat that is contained in the papers' webs above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly grieves their eyes, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
and because of this, they lie on their faces downward, and sleep lying down, and their papers are beneath them with their wet sorceries that swell and appearance have concealed the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press on the shoulder with your hands and feel the joint within.
And the manner of the work is such that the patient places his head on your side;
and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains, then place it on the; and press with your hands from both sides, so that the contents be assembled within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture an incision with a sharp spoon, and let it not be any wider than the wound one makes in the healthy vein;
and cut the skin properly until you see the contents; and often fat oozes from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Draw out then the entire piece of cloth between your two fingers at the wound, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed;
and be sure not to touch inside the wound, so that you do not come all the way to the spinal cord near the eye, and injure it.
And if the fat does not appear at the beginning of the wound, gently enlarge the wound a little bit until it appears.
then draw it out as we have said, then moisten gauze in oil and wine, and place it over the wound, and bandage with linen.
And if such people who grind grain and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then treat until he is healed.
And if an abscess hot comes to the site, apply soothing plasters until it is healed.
of the hairs of papers When in papers grow hairs different from the natural ones, and are fully grown, they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and ichor, to the extent that this is a cause of eye damage;
and it is the cure according to four methods: or by fire cautery altogether with heat, or by medicinal treatment using water as in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand;
if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick with an needle along the entire thread; and let the thread be placed along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread across the entire paper, and cut it with the razor;
then cut in the part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, to the entire sphumil, from the large flap until the small one;
then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, then draw a figure on the paper like the laurel leaf, and make sure that the figure is according to the quantity you see fit to remove from the paper which is divided for all.
And if there is a need, one should use a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper has been softened.
then fill the spatumile on both sides that you have marked, and start from the large nozzle until small. and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the width of a root, then put an ounce in one of the two corners of the cheek, and then cauterize it completely.
then sew the two lips together with a thread of fine wool on one stitch, and wipe away the blood, and remove the excess threads on both sides of the stitches with gluey substances, if you wish to do this.
and if you do not, then do not worry about it, and leave the stitch and threads for three days or four.
then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and binding substances, for the paper will dry suddenly around the wound and its closure, but the stitch will rot (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear. and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and if you suture the paper in a shape that is as large as a mirt leaf, as we have described, sew it three times around according to the form given here:
then cover those that overlie the small forces equally according to the form which is given here:
And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, take an needle with one thread, and insert it into the shape: and then pass another thread from the large hole, and the second thread from the small one, and join the two threads equally;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have marked, as we have described, then join the two edges of the wound by stitching, and continue to treat until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, pacify it with poultices and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes the hair of the paper is converted:
then you must use what we have said about the incision:
but the stitch on one side and the other is more artificialized.
The treatment of cankers is according to this form: and you should convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two cankers by art, and two fine ligatures as long as the paper and as wide as the space is; and hold the threads at the head of the part where you have them;
then assemble the one and the other delicately on what surmounts from the paper of the oil, and hold the two cankers from the two parts formed; and let it thus for some days, and the skin which is constrained will die, wither, and fall off, until it falls by itself.
If it delays, and the wound has some strength, then treat it until it heals.
and when the wound is healed, and the paper is removed, the hairs will not grow again.
and this is the form of two cauterizations that you will perform according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
the operation is such that you take a fine needle, and thread through it a thin silk filament. then join the heads and tie both subtly, and let the lengths of the threads be one palm in length.
then arrange another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the threads.
then place the patient's head on your side.
and shield from the sun so that the work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate work. Then hold the needle throughout the thread at the root of the added hair, and pierce it quickly into the paper as you pull it over the natural hair.
then extract the hair until it reaches the thread, and place that hair in the thread if there is one or two or three or more.
then withdraw your hand when the hairs grow out through all the passages in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the passage is treated and the hairs do not grow out with it, draw the passage off over all the thread that you have ordered, until the passage grows out through the hole above and you see it with the eye's vision;
Then draw the passage and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 days or 3, until the hair grows in its place and flesh appears above.
and if the hair is small, accompany it with a long natural hair, and lift it with that or where you leave it, until it stretches and then release it.
of the corruption of the oil When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways of it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a surgical cut, or by similar means.
And the method of treatment is that you cut the stitches, separate the edges of the wound, and put linen bandages inside, and bind it until it heals;
and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first.
but use things that soften, such as fenugreek. and the head be anointed with water or ale and roasted flaxseed, and unguents melted in any of the oils, and it be wrapped in a tent, and the treatment of this.
And the end of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal improperly according to the form it had before;
and these works that we have said are only for treatments of this illness, so that it does not return in the form it had before.
This disease that is truly called "acracie", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds, tears, fire cautery, and similar things.
and the way of the work is that you take a needle, in which there be double thread, and put the point into the flesh, and make it pierce from left eye to right, so that the threads come out at two heads of the flesh.
then the flesh is above all the needle, and the cloth around the spatule wide. And if the shape of the paper figure comes back as it should, that is good;
and if not, take the razor and place it in the crack, turn the paper, and make two cracks on the side of the paper.
and let the heads of the two cracks be at the two angles of the incision you have made, and make such angles that when they are assembled, the figure is as in the figure of a letter which has a "Latin cross".
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that your sides are swollen with, from what remains of the paper, then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen.
then apply the dressing of what we have said regarding the soothing medicines, and bandages until he is healed.
And if the disease comes from a wound or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full split between the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above. then separate between the two flaps of a dressing as I have said;
then separate between the two flaps of a dressing as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is much varied in form, and the master surgeons prepare means with all their power to make the limb return to its natural form.
and the patient himself, according to what needs to be done and the instruments in various preparations.
When this bond occurs in a man's hand in such a manner that the paper above is stiffened with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then you must therefore put the point of a razor beneath the paper and lift it upwards;
and extract it with forceps, until you get what is attached to the fine membrane, which should neither be too rough nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the membrane being too rough and causing the eye to become inflamed;
and make your incision, burning the gathered paper lightly, so that the paper heals according to its natural form;
and let the entire gathering heal, and do not again in the eye make it watery and salty, and wash it with sweet water and wine.
then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye moistened wool from an egg. and after the third day use a collar and other sovereign things until he is cured.
Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to hard syphilis, and another which is not nervous but is similar to white moisture frozen, and when touched with iron and treated with tongs, it cannot be moved.
and both seem to begin near the large lacrimal gland, and grow little by little until they cover the entire field of vision, all light, and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is such that the patient places their head on your lap, then open their eyes; and hold the paper with your hand, then press the nail with the forceps of small size, and lift it above; then take a needle, and place the hair of horse, or cow, or ox, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it completely with the entire needle. Bind the nail with a thread and lift it above, then scorch the side of the nail that contains the vein and the sinew to the hair until the root, then cut the remaining part at the root of the horn with subtle forces and small strength, leaving the natural flesh or horn, so that the body does not weep tears through this incision as it is accustomed to.
and sometimes the nail grows on its own, at the tip, as we have said. then after the scorching, one has all the specific form of the sore from which this is:
And ensure that the blister does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced;
and after the incision, pour some sifted salt into the eye, and from a collar made of litharge, use it until the next day; and then treat it as it requires until it is healed.
and if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the nails cannot enter it, often this similarity of the nail is treated with medicines.
and grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it heal, operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light slightly sharpened according to this form: and reset the nail gently, and if you see that it diminishes at all and the edge presses against it, distill from your mouth into the angry eye made of litargyrum and red collyrium and salt, plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is contrary in the eye, as with a hot abscess, then let it alone, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
then resume the other operation according to this same method until it is completely removed.
and if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the eye by great damage, suspend it with a needle, and remove part of it but not all, so that no tears will arise.
then distill mercury red which is made of litharge into the eye.
Some people's eyes produce red thread once, and this covers the pupil and is held on papers and turned over, seeming like a water-lily rose.
and the procedure is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, then closes their eyes, and brings all this thread to suitable needles for this, and holds it with force.
then remove the first thread, and continue cutting down to the edge, and be sure not to injure the eye during the procedure.
and make the incision in the sclera as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small force by which one removes the cataract, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with brine or distill red colchicum and similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a piece of cotton soaked in egg white, so that it remains hot abscess.
and if it stays nothing, and the abscess exceeds, and you doubt an abscess is hot, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do with the wounds that are treated in this manner.
But nonetheless, it is necessary that you moderate the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course. and from the way of accidental injury, in the work of iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, they tolerate the work for vision and weaken the eye throughout the day.
Therefore, in the first place, you should look to see if the eye, where the pain is located, is out of place, and there is no other disease except the pain. then realign it in such a manner:
instruct the patient to place their head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be doubled in subtlety according to this form:
And let there be two ounces per degree in the body according to this form:
then one should gently apply those veins, and wipe the blood an hour later, until you see those veins removed from the eye.
and beware not to injure the eye with the points of the spatumiles, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be most diligent in your work so that you do not harm those veins.
and when you have done this, distill green and red bile into the eye to corrupt what remains of the swelling.
And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, apply a plaster to the eye using things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of the warm abscess, then resume according to this method until it is healed.
and these are the forms of the forces:
They are called "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it with fire cautery and medicine of burning essence as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, then indeed in what you cut over the abscess, lai or where it should die, and draw out all the moisture that it has, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then clean it with all the instrument of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron for the head and should be pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
And place on the wound the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption has stopped;
and do this once, then restore the wound with medicated dressings.
if the bones are set, and flesh grows, and the core of the wound is set, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not become infected or abscessed, and no bad accident happens, know that he is healed;
if not, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and with cold medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take the saw according to this form, and let the iron head of the saw have three angles, and the blade be thin down to the teeth as you see here:
then place the saw on the bone near the eye, and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the whole saw until it pierces the bone and let the patient feel it through the pain if you keep your hand on your nose.
and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens around the bone, the matter will come to the surface of the skin. if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the eyes are completely open and there is no obstruction or reduction, it is necessary to bind the patient.
then the healthy eye, then apply suction cups or a pustulum without injuring to suck out, then put on the eye the ligature made of myrrh and aloes and incense and sal ammoniac, and then withdraw the eye, and dress with bandages and cloths.
and the method of cloths is that you take soft cloths, and fold each one into four, then place them one over the other according to the amount that the eyes require.
then draw out from above with a hard bandage, and repeat the cups to suck without piercing;
then remove the cups and hold the eye steady day and night, and if the ligatures become loose, you must tighten them greatly.
then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good.
if not; then apply the plaster and bandages and the ligature and cups until it is healed.
of the tearing of woollen fabric or vein When disruptions come to the retinal tissue, then open up and come through the papers as if by grains of resin, and is terrifying to see.
then if you see it cover, the operations are such that you stick one needle into the root of the part below until it reaches the one above, then stick another needle or have a doubled thread from the part under the eye; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position.
then remove the doubled thread and tie a part of the uve around it, and hold it tight, then withdraw the needle and place over the eye moistened cloth from an egg yolk.
and leave it until the thread is tied with the uve, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound heals.
and sometimes the wound is bound around each part of a circle of cloth until it heals.
And if the eyes appear greatly swollen, pierce them with a sharp needle that comes from the depth of the eye, and drain the moist, milky fluid, and let them enter soon.
then extract it until it heals.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by water that gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not actually water.
and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on the prepared seat straight, then take the head between your hands from one side, and move the jaw until you see the water come to the upper part of your eyes. then it should be pierced, and not descend and let the light out, and show the patient the things as he is accustomed to.
and if it does not descend out, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the boil is not prepared as we have said.
seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a cut on the corneal membrane just along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, so that the boil comes out;
and when it has come out, instill into the inflamed eye warm honeyed liquid, or boiled fenugreek water and honey, then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
of the eye's waters We have found similarities of fevers in the division, and what must be pierced; if in doing so according to health.
It must be that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, and tie the healthy eye and hold it very tightly;
then place the cloth of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are in your left hand, or on your right hand if the eyes are in your right;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are in your left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are in your right;
then place the tip of the instrument between the corne by the thickness of a hair in that part of the socket of the eye near the inner corner, then insert the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and twist your hand until it pierces through the socket of the eye, and feel that almagda enters the hollow.
and the size of the almagda passage should be precisely the size from the prunelle to the edge of the nictitating membrane. and this is the corne of the eye.
if you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument there where the sharpness is, and press it out through one passage after another.
if the liquid flows now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a short time, and if the fluid rises again by the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and does not rise, gently extract it by turning your hand little by little.
and then put a bit of the gemstone thread in water, and remove the eye from it. Then put something to plug the eye, such as a piece of wet wool soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and secure it with healthy eye tissue.
Now, and those of our time, put on a warm cloth with abundant egg.
And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which the form is as follows:
And pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it a fine incision, then gently extract it, as we have said.
and at the completion of the work, provide the patient with a sleeping draught, in which he will sleep on his back in a dark place.
and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to its position until three days.
then release him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back until seven days.
and it is not fitting to do this during the hour of the treatment or after the incision immediately, but you must apply this, because the fluid rises rapidly.
if abscesses on the eye come up, you must release the eye before seven days, and follow the treatment that alleviates the abscess.
and when it is appeased, release the vision and place upon its face a cover for any day, and let it be in that dark house.
And then leave the house little by little, and adapt to its surroundings;
and know that no clerics should intervene in this case. And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their land they made almagda perforated, through which one lets water flow, but nonetheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them will suffer;
and may they be properly of arsenic: And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
Sometimes there arise or do not arise injured limbs of various kinds, some of which resemble scorpions with stingers.
and if there are such cases where the limb is deeply embedded with a colored wound, and if the limb has an open wound of good color. In the case of these limbs that have an open wound but not deeply embedded, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun.
In the case of these limbs that have an open wound but not deeply embedded, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun. and fume his nostrils, and sprinkle the limb with an ounce, and draw it out. hold the point of the sharp needle under the spine as long as you know that the flesh is completely separated.
And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, open it with all the instruments gently, so that nothing remains. and if it suppurates or forms an abscess, apply the aid as appropriate;
and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the flesh is removed, then apply warm or cold vinegar or wine. If the pus works and moisture comes to the throat, know that it is healed;
and if moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, to which the instruments cannot come to cut:
then you must place a slightly thick thread of linen, and knot it with our hands, leaving between each knot a small amount of space. and put the patient's shoulder on the thread in such a way that it can move, and draw gently until it comes out through the neck into the mouth.
and many times they do so with children at school, and it is a simple matter for those who know how to do it.
then hold the front that comes out through the neck with one hand, and the back that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after another as we are at the thread.
Make it so that you know the nose has corrupted that flesh, then draw the thread, wipe away the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and replace it as before.
do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that has remained of flesh;
and then put a pled of lint on the nose for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which one distills oils and medicines into.
And let it be of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a pled, and guide it thus.
and if you see, make a closed incision, and let the instruments be full for purging the brain;
and hold the head for keeping it still when heating the oil or any liquid.
from the cheek below the nose
Many times, a disease called "telul" arises in the head near the nose and grows and becomes large; when it is visible to look at.
and for this, you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it thoroughly, then apply the fire cautery or the burning medicine over it.
and if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, observe whether it is hard, pale in color, or lacks sensation.
if he does not touch it with iron at all because it is an embedded abscess, for when one treats it even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is due to a boil and not from a blackened wound, and you see that one can drain it completely, then empty the patient and treat it without fear, and cure the iron with drying and restraining substances.
When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, for in some men.
Therefore, when this occurs to any person, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two edges with a stitch, and treat it until it heals.
and if the edges are already separated on both sides, then it is necessary that you cauterize all parts of their roots until they heal, then adjust the two edges with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense. and place a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster on the powder, and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat with ointment until he is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of the lips
By hand, abscesses in the lips appear hard, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips, incise along each fold, and take it with forceps and divide into each part;
then apply the linen after the incision of the vitreous body until the bleeding is stanched;
and then apply an ail leaf, and dress the linen with dry substances until it is healed.
Often a sore arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
then you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let the tooth or blood run.
then place on the linen the vitreous body incised, or other constricting and drying powders.
and if that sore returns after the incision, and this happens many times, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it. if it does not return after the fire cautery;
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums and the tissues that are ugly and harsh. and sometimes they make the teeth black and yellowish and decayed, as corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth become stinky.
it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and his head on your lap, and reset the teeth or tissues when there remains nothing. and thus treat the blackness and greenish color, and jaundice and other stains, until they are removed.
and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, restart from the second day and the third, until you have done all.
and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to extract them, according to what the operation demonstrates, for the rasp used to extract teeth has other forms than those used between the teeth. and these forms and others be with you prepared.
and when you treat the tooth of its pain, you should delay the treatment as much as you can, for it should not be done hastily. because this is a very high substance until one has no excuse to erase.
Then when the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, it must be certain that the tooth is decayed. Many times the pain torments the patient, and they think it is from Saint's teeth, and makes them draw good teeth; and always the pain does not cease from that until the bad thing is extracted, for we have often done this to these saints;
and when you are certain of the diseased tooth, it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth with a hot iron to protect the gum from all sides;
then pull it out with your forceps or fine pliers at the first gap and gap, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the pliers; and let the shoulder of the patient be on your holy lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and agitate it as you have done first.
and if the tendon is pierced and torn, you must fill it with cloths, or where the tears are; and if you extract it gently with tongs, so that it does not break during extraction;
and you must cut deeply between the gum to extract the tooth.
And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part of it, as this can cause the patient greater pain than the initial pain due to the malice of the root.
And be careful that you do not act as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through their hastiness and boldness, break the marrow often, and do not bring what we have described.
but they are brought about once by the incision of that great disease due to the roots remaining, or to the decay that they break, as we often wish;
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or apple and salt;
and if the bleeding continues, which often happens, apply the powder of vitriol;
and if that does not work, then cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, which one must use to draw the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you are drawing the tooth.
and these are the forms: And let them have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and let them be well-made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold tightly.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains during extraction, you should place moistened cotton wool in oil or burre on the shoulder for one or two days until the shoulder is softened. Then remove the forceps called "algefri," which seem like the beaks of birds.
and they should also be made as in a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out all around these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", that is, pincers, of which see the form:
And it should be broad and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root comes out through this, that is good.
if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if you aid with this instrument that has two claws, of which see the form: and other instruments that are in front by the reason of the teeth, and from this instrument which seems a pair of large forceps, of which see the form:
And let this instrument not be broken, and know that many dental instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not listed;
and the master arrows find their own instrument by themselves, according to those that their work and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach any instruments because of the diversity of parts and bones, or where they rot, so they seek the appropriate instruments, as I have said, and use gestures, the forms of which are what follows:
And let them be large and well-designed to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed.
and then restore the head of the shoulder with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, remove it with all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the tooth has grown after the others and is not in its right place, and cannot be corrected or filed.
then extract it; and if it is born with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is described, and similar to a small tweezer, and let it be made of sharp iron.
And gently move it day by day with your hand due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you cannot move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a small file as its shape is.
and is also like the file used to make needles.
and file the tooth little by little with your hands gently, so that it does not move until it heals;
then file the edge in the end with a plain rasor, and if the edge is too sharp and blunts the tongue, then you must file the harshness until it is equal, so that it does not blunt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front teeth ache due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot hold food in his mouth without choking, and you have treated them with restrictive medications, then this is ineffective.
if they need to be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never changes.
and let the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to direct the threads, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the adjacent teeth, whether there is one or more, as long as you firmly reach to the other healthy tooth. then resume the covering from where you began, and gently but firmly hold your hand, ensuring it does not move.
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
then clip the heads of the thread with tweezers, and join them, and pass them between the healthy tooth and the affected one, ensuring they do not choke the tongue.
and then let it be so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the threads break, you restrain it with another thread;
if it stays tight and will serve so throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two roots, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, you put it back in its place, frequently and freshly, as we have said;
and do not undertake it except by those who are wise and suffer, and once the form of an ivory tooth is made, you place it in the spot where a tooth is missing, and restrain it as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
Sometimes these come from the tongue or natural causes, that one is born thus. or through an accident of a healed wound.
and the procedures are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and place their head on your lap, and tie their tongue.
then cut the nerve cord, while the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knotting, and this is due to a recent wound, then use the lancet and cut that ligament.
and ensure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery is beneath it.
and when you have done, lift the cloth of rose water or almond water, or cold water, then place a linen tent over the tongue;
and let the patient take the lotion each night, so that the joint may not swell.
and if bloodletting is needed, place vitriol powder over the cloth. and if the bleeding continues, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this. and continue to treat until he is healed.
and if you see any sore that is red or black or hard, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it at all, for it is a sore.
and if it is declining towards blenchor and there is moisture, then he throws in the ounce, and cuts a small hole with a slender spike, and delivers it on both sides; and if the stone strikes during your work, then place broken glass on it until it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated all pain.
then lift the shoulder and arm, and treat other wounds until they are healed.
of the abscesses in the throat Sometimes there are lumps in the throat called "godaths," and they are properly known as two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, take care:
if it is abscesses hard of small size and flesh-colored, do not let them touch with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not let them touch with iron, nor for the discharge of blood. but let it be until it is ripe, and then you let it come to a head, or it would break on its own.
and if it is white in color around and the root is fine, have your instrument ready to cut, but first see if the abscess is cool and calm.
Then seat the patient in front of the sun, and their head be towards you, and let them close their mouth and have the sergeant hold their hand, pressing the tongue underneath the entire instrument, of which this is the form.
and may it be of fine silver or tin as thin as knives:
And press the tongue with all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take one scruple and stick it in the almond, and draw out more than you can.
and draw out nothing from the tissues with it, then close the instrument, of which here is its form, that seems like strong force. and always the head is curved, and one part against another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use tongs, of which here is the form: And be sharp on one side, and on the other called nom;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after incising, gargle the patient with hot sharp water, or with sharp and easy water, and if there is a flow of blood, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peel, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched. then continue the treatment until he is healed;
and if any other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, cut them in the same manner as the two almonds.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that had arisen in her throat, specifically the small sensation abscess.
and had nearly completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not expire because the passage was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for one or two days.
And the abscess was so large that it required two fingers to be placed through the two openings of the neck.
I hastened quickly, and pierced one of the veins, then pulled out the arrow, extracting a large portion of flesh in the process;
then pierced the other vein in the other nostril hole, and opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
after piercing the vein in these abscesses, and extracted some part of it, and only a little blood came out. and thus the passage of the throat was cleared for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued cutting into that abscess for a long time.
and the abscesses regrew, and filled up the wound that I had emptied, to such an extent that it became very large;
then I set it in place and cauterized inside the throat: then the growth ceased.
and I left these parts, and only let God decide what would happen to them after me.
of the eye
When rheumatism affects the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is very large and round, it is called "eye".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the pus of the abscess is pacified and it is fine, then you should cut it out.
and that which is round gathered and is not long; and if it is bloody or of a flesh color or black, then you should incise it. For there is great danger for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it as described according to the manner I have said, of its blueness and length, you should place the patient in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument about which we made mention earlier. then one should insert the lancet into the vein, draw it outwards, and use one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the almonds.
And you must not cut more than the superfluous which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of applying heat, you must use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate their fear.
And the manner of the cautery is with hot water. And the patient should place their head on your clean surface, and then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the fire cautery, and cover it with live water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear. and when using the preparation of this instrument, of which here is its form:
And let it have one end or head of a spoon where the medicine is placed, like the heads of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient be lying on their side, so that the saliva and muscle fluid flow from their mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the blister form.
then hold your hand on the medicine and press it against the eye for half an hour, until you see it swollen and the stinging of the medicine is alleviated.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with medicine, and insert the instrument fully into the cotton in the eye socket until the cotton is saturated.
and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and remove after four or five days.
and if you need to reapply the cautery with medicine, do so, and after the cautery, wipe around the eye socket with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
and rinse with cold water, and gargle with medicated solutions until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, and than the cautery;
If it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamus and yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and hyssop and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or any of them in a pot, and put them there, and let them boil;
and the pots be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot have the instrument covered according to this manner: And may be of silver or of iron, and may one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed;
after the reconstitution often, until the eyes dry, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, for many things happen. and do not do this when the hot abscess is declining.
And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place an eggshell inside the hole, so that the patient does not get too hot. for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh down on the mouth, and this is a good cure overall for healing.
Many times it is made of the throat bone or spiny fish bone, or some other thing.
if therefore you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see move the thing;
and what does not enlighten you and is placed in the throat, it must be made to vomit the patient as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is burnt through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the string to the sponge, and then have it swallowed; and when it comes to its place, it will wither, and then you shall draw forth;
and if it does not come forth as we have said, take an instrument of plunge according to this form:
And let the instrument be angled towards the head so that it can enter more readily into the throat, with the head lifted upwards; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, which could cause it to swell, nor push the bone in.
and make sure that the patient moves the instrument, for it is either moved or the thing is dry. if the bottle is sealed, or he draws it out forcefully with the entire instrument equally.
from the throat juice
No blood is medicated, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the blood, draw it off with a very small lancet, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if that does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow hot air from the cane, and do this often. And if the patient is sick with fever all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, and pour it into the mouth, and let it be swallowed, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with arsenic sulfide, using the instrument I said in the fumigation of the eye.
Do this many times, for it will fall without resistance.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and in that perforation is placed the head of the instrument.
Then throw in the fumigating material, and the patient put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape but goes to the pus.
and the pus will now fall out, and if it does not fall, then resume the fumigation many times.
and the patient suffers thirst, eats salty and stale foods, and does not drink water.
and then it is necessary that she be forced to expel it through this regimen.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the pus is such that when one can see it, it resembles bent tongs meant to enter the throat. and it should resemble a surgeon's forceps, and it should have the roughness of a file, such that whatever it touches, it cannot let go.
Much resemblance of abscesses are, according to what memory brings hereafter in this book, and they differ in puncture and incision;
and it is in two ways, of which one is in its very resemblance and of what it holds, being moist.
And the second way is for those lues where they are in the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those in the body, and abscesses of fatty tissue are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if in abscesses one should not puncture them, as long as the pus is dead according to its completion;
and if in such cases one should puncture them when they are ripe and do not become dead according to their completion, as abscesses that are deep in joints.
For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them be until they are rotten within, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is deep within the principal member, and you delay the incision until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member;
or it is deep within the foundation, pierce it thus when it is ripe;
and it is not fitting that you incise an abscess that is firm before digestion is completed, even if it is deep within the foundation, lest it rot thoroughly and become a fistula; and cannot heal in a great while.
And you must know the time of incising the abscess when it is ripe according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and swelling and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
and it must be that you set the perforation or more dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens and moves;
and let the perforation be long for the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere else where there is no bend. In those that bend, according to that member.
And when abscesses are in living flesh, it is best to leave the perforation until its digestion is completed, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before that, the venom of it will spread along the body, and be full of much filth. and by chance harden the lips and the deeper parts of it.
And if for any abscess that is perforated according to the size of the body, as the member requires.
and you must administer for small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cracks according to the size of the abscess;
and if such large abscesses require cutting to the core and covering; and when it has become as soft as flax and is softened, you should treat it as you would with boils:
and if they are split into three angles, and if such wounds are treated as the leaves of juniper, like abscesses of barbarians;
and if they are such that a round incision is made, and other cuts similar to them are treated.
Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess, it must be pierced completely.
And it must be done when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus; if you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but only part of it. then dress the abscess until the next day, and then drain some more another time. do this many times, little by little, until all the pus is out.
the same if the patient has weak vital force, or is a woman with child, or small children, or old and feeble individuals. For if the patient shudders several times with the discharge of the pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you are not to blame.
Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a clean incision, apply dressings of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then you should insert a dressing in each so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and have closed it over, then you should fill it with old cotton or the shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it for three days;
then the bone, and the dressing of ointment until it is healed.
And if the bleeding occurs during your work, administer cold water and ease it, and place a soft cloth over the area bleeding many times.
And if the bleeding persists, and you administer government and treatment, and the powders that I have said in my hand in this book, and if it is or tends to be in winter, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary that you place on tents and moist cloths in wine and hot oil.
And if it is in summer, and the wound is fresh, then it is necessary that you place on moist cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, for three days, as we have said.
And then extract the abscess and dry and dress it as needed until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
And as I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
When small abscesses appear on the head, and their appearance is like little bags, as with the strings of a berry, and there are many that resemble them.
There are fatty ones and similar ones with moisture as in boils;
and there are hard and stony ones for the cutter, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause opposition.
And the operations of the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "entromissoire," from which the form follows, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, let it out through the top for a long time.
And when the moisture is evacuated, scorched it without leaving anything of the skin that contains that moisture, for it will repeatedly adhere if nothing is left.
then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, with water and thread, and fill the wound, and let it until the next day; and let that which has remained from the night flow.
And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night;
then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds on to its greasy substance, shape the poultice according to this form, longwise. and pourceed with your leeches, and burn it from all sides, and place all your treatment to draw out the fluid where it lies.
and if the artery does you harm, do as I said after.
And also do so for the abscess if it is stony, and for cutting and treating as I have said.
And when you cut into the stony abscess and the moisture, it is less dangerous, because they contain little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head injuries have no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I treated or head injury from an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard as a dull stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if any of them had been cut, it would have also been well done like cutting a stone.
In other abscesses coming from or to the head, those that come to the head of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening must always be at the lowest point, so that the boil can discharge.
and treat the wounds as they should.
Many times such an abscess occurs in the neck, beneath the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes comes from other parts or organs, and are hard, and are joined together with one another.
And each scrofula is properly within its socket, like the node and the abscess of the head, as we have said. and the manifestations of these scrofula are many.
and the manifestations of these scrofula are many. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and will not obey health.
where you see good disposition upon touch, and resembles the color of the body, mute in every part and not arched near the neck nor at the artery nor the vein, and is not deep.
then you should cut it open from above, and scorch each part, and place the two lips of the wound with the needles, if you have need to do so, as we have said for abscesses of the head.
and draw slightly and gradually, be sure that you do not crush the nerve nor the vein, nor the spatumileagus nor the trenchers, that the hand does not escape, and do not go too far, lest you crush what you should not.
And if you crush the vein or the artery, and it does not allow further operation, place vitriol powder or any other coagulants in the wound to stop the bleeding and compress the wound. and leave it until the abscess is eased, and the wound becomes softened and begins to rot.
And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work until you complete it.
then you should indicate if there are any small scrofulous swellings remaining, and drain and cleanse them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not fitting that you cut into that scrofulous swelling at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread, and let it fall away through it without harm.
then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and dress it.
And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and suture them now, since there has been no excess due to the size of the scrofula. it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and extract it forcefully, and suture it as we have said.
it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and extract it forcefully, and suture it as we have said. Those scrofulous swellings caused by superfluity, puncture them where they appear to heal.
and puncture them in the manner described before, depending on the case, and apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, apply the ointment treatment until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone perform it in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
For those with scrophula, it is necessary to cut the slit in the throat which is called "epiglote"; and one should not seek aid from them, for their veins and principal arteries are often hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the disease is in the channel of the jugular vein, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglote, we must cut it over three or four small cuts through, between the two circles or by the size of the cut on the outside, not in the cartilage;
and if the gills are suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so there is no flesh, and the vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is timid, it must be stretched from the entire length of the neck to the chin, then cut the skin until it reaches the chain. and clamp the blood vessels if you see any, then sew up the incision as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the stream from the vein which jumps out due to the ligament that is broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a day.
And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is suspected, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it smoothly without touching the cartilage;
then administer medicines that promote healing until he is cured.
Albucasim said that one should not do this until the throat is completely numbed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and then the defect is addressed. Then apply the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and because of this, the ancients instructed to keep the wound open until the mischief of the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they ordered toç¼åˆä¼¤å£å¹¶æ¸…ç†ï¼Œç›´åˆ°å®ƒè¢«å½»åº•æ¸…æ´ã€‚
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took the knife, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the veins there;
and I was called to treat her, and found her already dead.
I uncovered the wound and found the blood issuing from it. I knew that she had not pierced a vein or artery, but the windpipe was injured by the wound.
I hastened there, dressed the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and there was no change in the lady's voice, and she returned to her normal state afterward;
for I say that in the operation of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced complexion, and it is very common in women.
and there are according to two methods: natural, and accidental;
or natural has no artifice.
And the accidental has two methods, of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other method is similar to an abscess that comes from a vein. and if there is fear, it should not be made too hot except in that which is small, and he tests and examines the intervening parts: if you find it as smooth as we find the nose, and has no vein, then cool it, as one cools the nose, and draw it to its skin if there is any. and examine well entirely, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is perfectly healed.
Many methods apply to us, of which I will describe all the similarities.
and now it is necessary for me to say all the difference that is between them.
I say that heat and fever arise as long as the boiling has passed, and the putrefaction is completed. Then the fever and heat subside.
With the new neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the abscess, which is its own sack and according to the color of the body, and begins as a pustule, and becomes large;
and they vary according to their forms, or greasy, or moist, and not much in color as I have said in the division.
It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses for us is that you should find or make more moist the place you find in the abscess, and turn your two tools little by little, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the interposer, and take care that it not jump.
If the moisture flows out, whether it be of any color, incise it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the interposer no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then incise it in a cross shape, and clamp it with forceps, and gently cauterize each part. Take care where it lies, and treat the surrounding tissue healthily with nitre.
and if you cannot treat it healthily as a whole, remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will cause the swelling to return many times.
and if it remains a little, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with some corrosive powders moistened, and hold the wound, and place on it things soothing for an abscess hot, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what nourishes flesh.
and if the vein beating is against it or another thing hastens it, apply the juice of pounded vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper that was left from the new.
Here are the forms of the inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small;
and there are three square ones, which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, to surround abscesses and fistulas;
and they are also like the needles with which we sew ligatures, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver. The yellow ones are said to be more effective for surrounding the cords of fistulas;
and there are three ways: great, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
The shapes of the oncin are like those of sheep, as you see here:
and if there are oncin with two corbeures in three ways as well;
and there are oncin with three corbeures, and they are also in three ways;
and there are oncin with two corbeures, and oncin with only one corbeure, and they are in three ways;
and all this are necessary in their place.
The head of these for which one does this is sharp, and such that cut only half way, hence one sears the nose, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
and of these introducers are the alembols inserted in the hands, so that the patient does not perceive them during the opening of abscesses.
and they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and one uses none of them deep in the body, such as in the legs, arms, and mammary glands, and in similar places.
and sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling the shells of acorns, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding: and it is placed once in its place which heals by copulation of veins and arteries, and again they do so according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin toè…çƒ‚ï¼Œç›´åˆ°çœ‹èµ·æ¥åƒå¥³äººçš„ä¹³æˆ¿ã€‚
and remain ugly and swollen, and if anyone wishes to treat them, they should do so according to this form from line .b. to .g.: then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with corrosive medicine. Then suture the two edges of the wound, and continue to treat until it is healed.
and if the breast hangs down and becomes soft due to its size, like it does in women, cut into two ribs above, following similar incisions. of which one should be held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contain the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until he is healed;
and if he is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the continued bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and let it be until the flesh and fat consume it, then treat it until he is healed.
These abscesses that come from arrow wounds are like hardened scrofula, or have lumps, and if they contain moisture, they do.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.: And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said for cuts in scrofula, and if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above is sutured, many abscesses arise, and similarly, it happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
and if one knows this way when it is for the artery, let the abscesses remain long to form; and when you feel it with your fingers, sense the constriction;
and when it is for the vein, let it come to a visible swelling;
and it is folly to treat this abscess, especially when it is near the armpits and angles and under the collarbone and many other places, and is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure, and in those who are inflamed from an artery, make a cut above the long skin.
then operate on the size at the inches, and cleanly cut the artery of the tissues until it is uncovered;
then pierce it with a needle, and let it pass to the other side, and restrain the artery with a doubled thread in two loops, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then puncture the space between the two threads with an introducer until the fluid comes out, and then release the abscess;
then continue with the treatment as Bowen enjoins, until the sinews relax; then treat it with ointment suited to it, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it must be treated by applying with your hand as much of the abscess as you can to the skin, then insert the needle under the part you hold with your hand and pierce it. Use a double thread, that you draw from the other side. then tie the abscess as I have told you, or with a ligature of one part to the shoulder blade with thread.
and if you doubt that the thread is finished, so you pull another needle through all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
then drain the abscess until the exudate stops, then drain the excess from the wound and leave what is tied;
then place on the cloth wet with wine and oil, then apply bandages and ointments until he is healed.
As abscesses coming to the artery and vein, abscesses of the nerves when they are injured, or through too great exertion, and similar things.
And this happens more frequently with joints and in all places where there are joints, and it is the concern of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many positions causing pain.
and when one holds it tightly, the patient feels pain, but not in their entire body, but beneath the heart;
and remains still in all directions, and neither goes forward nor backward, nor beneath nor above, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance there would be contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, cuts the skin with the spike.
and that which is on the head or forehead, cuts the skin with the spike. If the abscess is small, use forceps and treat it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with a needle, and cauterize it, then remove it and stitch the wound shut, and continue to treat until it heals.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else boil, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by resemblance to moss, and is the subtle roots, and the lumps large;
and in it there are some small and very large.
and I saw in the person who had two or more bellies which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and were somewhat split, and in them came a subtle moisture.
I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI ounces. The work of the operation is such that you should look if the patient is moist, and the color of the belly is white and moist and has subtle roots; if the cleft is wide, and the fire cautery is being performed in your presence.
if the cleft is wide, and the fire cautery is being performed in your presence. For in tailoring, there are often too great losses of blood, and if it does not stop, then you must hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision by the iron, then take a well-made platinum wire, place it on the margin as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then remove it, and do not cease to hold the platinum wire until it covers the margin, and continue working through it.
and if the roots are large, they may fear cutting directly for the belly, but you may cut half of it well, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cauterize the ulcer which is ofé€ƒè·‘çš„é¢œè‰²å’Œè´«å¼±çš„æ„Ÿè§‰å¹¶ä¸”æœ‰æ¸—æ¶².
For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
when the boil is hot If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterizing a wound or a cut in the flesh, and it is on the belly and there are some of the boils, as happens in other wounds, or from blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from wind.
and if it is from the wound in the flesh and the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a mild thing with little pain, and shows various openings. And if it is due to the issue of the intestines, then it is more varied, and when pressed at its base, it rises and then returns, and sometimes becomes swollen, and greatly increases at the entry to the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a mild thing, and clearly shows when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrain much.
and if it is due to blood, then open by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and puncture according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then sniff with a toucher, and the work is that you observe if the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
and if it is due to windiness, then sniff with a toucher, and the work is that you observe if the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness. Then you must let the treatment continue. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, then you must instruct the patient to extend his arm, and be stretched out straight, then prick around the mouth. then command him to lie quietly in your hands, then go around the limb that you have pricked all the way to the end of the spatillum, then place half of the abscess above at the length of the large inch. then bind it tightly with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let it be tied securely.
then work the middle part of the abscess extended over the thread, and place your index finger there, and hold the intestine; if you find it caught on the thread, release it, and place the intestine at the back of the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, take it with forceps, and drain the excess;
and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through it, and place the needles where you have marked that you pierced it;
then extract the abscess in four layers over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it rots, and cut out the dead flesh. or you may scrape it when it is soft and rotted, then treat the wound with what is needed, and cut out the abscess as we have said.
or you may scrape it when it is soft and rotted, then treat the wound with what is needed, and cut out the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound with what is needed, and dress the wound.
of the chancre We have said in the division about the symptoms of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid using the iron cure.
and let us say that the ulcer arises in the buttocks, and great caution is needed in its treatment; and the ancients said that when ulcers are on the body where one can scrape them, as with ulcers on the nipples, thigh, and similar places, they must be completely removed when they are in their beginning stage.
nor does any ulcer heal in my presence.
And the procedures, when they are in the body where one can remove them, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile;
then make it healthy if there is evident fullness, then instruct the patient to lie on his side for performing the work;
then throw out the tumors or ulcers, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with something, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood has stopped. then continue to treat until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already said in the division of the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these two cases: it is to know, tympany and dyspnea, for they are deadly things;
therefore when you treat this case of dropsy called "split open" by medicines, and the cure does not help, see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as distension of the belly and similar things; and do not use iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and has no other disease except dropsy alone, and is neither too weak nor too old, then treat in this manner: hold the patient's limb straight on your hands, and the ministers press the belly by putting the sharp spatumile at the lowest part of the wound, then take the sharp spatumile according to this form: And let it be cut into two parts. pointed, and in all ways do not let it enter too deeply so that it might come as far as the intestines when inserted, and do not bend it;
then observe if the abscess in the wound is connected to the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut three straight lines above the opening with the knife; and if the abscess is due to the disease of the liver, let your cut be on the left side of the opening three lines.
and if it is for the muscle, let it be on the right side, and it is not fitting that the patient lie on the split so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak side.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and scrape it out, and withdraw your hand from all the spatumile between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue as if scraping to the quantity of a nail or slightly more.
then pierce the subcutaneous tissue until the spatumile comes to the proper place, and these are the seats of the water, then withdraw, and remove this instrument from which it is shaped. And it is similar to a thin silver needle, and it is made of fine or light steel, and has in the part over the small puncture. and if there is pain on one side, three punctures; and two on the other side, and one on the other;
and the head is cut like a pen, and this is the form of the incision that the writers cut the pen:
on the head above is the alamele, so that when the instrument comes to the edge, it passes now above the instrument;
empty therefore the half or the third part, for if you empty more than is fitting in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the discharge of his spirit through the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he approaches death;
but according to emptiness based on the quantity of its virtue, and according to those that the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
then draw the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now for the cauterization which stops the perforation that is above the syphax, of which I have spoken, that you puncture in this manner.
then renew the application of the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small quantity of fluid.
do this on any day, and beware of following it too much so that there is no more fluid but just a little.
And if you doubt about the patient, and there is much water, cure it with a hot burial ground or sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and make it drink. and the treatment with medicinal powders until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
No child is born who does not have pores in the penis, or the pores are small, or they are not in their proper place.
If it is necessary to act quickly before the semen becomes very subtle according to this form:
then put or insert the thin wooden probe, and tie it and keep it thus for 3 days or 4. When it desires to urinate, then remove the probe, and let it urinate, and then replace it;
and if by chance this is not necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
If the hole is small, it should be treated with a plug of plonc, as we have said, and it will expand.
Those who do not have the perforation in their penis are circumcised, for none are born with the perforation at the head of the penis, hence they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards. and cannot copulate because the matter cannot come as far as the female organ, and this is a serious illness.
And the method of the operation is that the patient lies very still on their back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are also made as small as the size of a feather, so that the perforation is exactly in the middle, as it should be.
and beware of the discharge of blood that comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the pustules of the verge Often this albath appears in the verge, and it is a sign of ugly flesh.
and among them there are both malignant and non-malignant.
then you should puncture them with a sharp needle, and drain and clean them thoroughly, then place soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them. then apply the ointment of diafinicon until they are healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, you must apply a fire cautery to it.
When you have drained it, and if the albath is both within the verge and partly inside the skin and partly outside, then you must remove the part of the albath that is inside first. and when it is set, then the wound heals.
and when you treat it together, the head of the shoulder must not be pierced, or blackness and corruption will occur in the head and joint.
then you must cut out all that is black and corrupt, then bind it with a plaster made of pomegranate bark and vinegar, then continue to treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The fire cautery aids in both dispositions together: that is to say, for the evacuation of blood, and for corruption;
and if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a cane into the head of the shoulder, and let the patient excrete through it.
and when the hair is shaved on the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then you must therefore cauterize it with a heated instrument, until the threads are released, and the heads of the penis are delivered from all sides;
and if it is necessary to discuss this further, you must cauterize it with a spatula for a moment on the head of the penis and the skin;
then separate the skin between two, and place a soft linen cloth in cold water over it, so that it is not shaved again.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity as with other wounds; wholly whenever we perform this work of our will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most gentle for health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have none but what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision on infants, and with forceps, and on all parts of the body;
if the threads slip because there are two layers, and by accident one sews the upper layer while leaving the lower one loose. or one must redo theç¼åˆï¼Œç–¼ç—›ä¼šåŠ å€ï¼Œè€Œä¸”ç”±äºŽä»Žè…¹è‚¡æ²Ÿéƒ¨ä½çš„æ¸…æ´—ä¸å¤Ÿç¡®ä¿è‚¢ä½“çš„ä¼¤å£æ„ˆåˆã€‚
and in the cleaning of the nail by accident the iron escapes, and spoils the work, and often they do not need cleansing and I have seen this.
From the purification which is done with forceps on all the strand of hair, I have found the virtue of the experiment, for the forceps cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut it evenly along the length. but that the threads be very thin between the skin;
and let it be in the manner of the first operation so that you make the child, if they hear, think that you are only threading the thread along the shaft and then letting it slip in all the ways you can.
then let it be straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
then place your hand on the shaft and blow or kiss it, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is fully extended. then clean well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the vein with a doubled thread, then tie it between one knot and another.
then clean well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the vein with a doubled thread, then tie it between one knot and another. and hold it at two points by the second tying, at the point and the mark indicated, and place between the two ties, then quickly cut the knot above and pull the head of the needle; then let the blood flow little by little, for this is what heals. and put powder on and over the powder, wrap it with a cloth glued from one half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose oil well and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and continue to treat until it is healed.
The form of strength at consecration is this:
let the heads be held firm and sharp, and let the heads be as large as the equal arm:
the error of consecration is when the cords within escape during the incision;
therefore it must be stretched with your nail as the cords make an abscess.
and the cord equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with forceps, and then tie the cord.
And if they penetrate for three days, and what is below the wound swells, let it be left until the abscesses subside, and then gently brand it.
if you move it as much as you can, and guard the part of the member, it will not harm him in any way.
Treat then the head of the wound from powder injuries, as we have said in treating powders, and if you move the heart too much, and it goes above, it will not harm him.
Treat then, as we have said, until he is healed.
retainment of urine
The retention of urine is due to kidney stones, or frozen blood, or bile, or new flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the classification.
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the kidney or neck of the bladder, then it is fitting that the patient be made to lie on his knees. and place his feet on the back, and extend his belly above the part of the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can. and then the neck of the bladder is constrained for the passage of the stone above, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer the extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which its form is described here:
and it should be made of fine silver, light and thin, like the feathers of an eagle; and let its length be one and a half palms, and let it be fine at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the end a little wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread into the syringe;
and remove the excess of wool and put it just to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on the chair, and anoint the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water.
and gently place the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then lift the penis upward toward the mouth.
and push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel when the urine comes from the empty thing. And this is not done according to this order because the path it goes is twisted.
then the thread is tied little by little, and the urine follows the thread, then it is pulled out, and the urine flows.
and repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relax the patient.
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is present, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medications, then use an instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
It is closed, and if at three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
and place the flax fibers so that the medicine coating is thick enough to anesthetize well the vein without adding moisture, and remove when needed.
and when you see the medicine flowing into the bladder, place the tip of the cuspidar in the moisture and remove it quickly.
if you draw out the moisture from there, and then set it firmly. if the moisture enters there and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which we cleanse the bladder:
And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher;
and over the other side or the hanging ligaments;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you wish to use for cleansing the bladder inside it. Then tie it between the two sides with a double thread forming a small bag, and heat that part of the moisture over fire;
then pour out the head of the cistern into the vagina, then hold your hand over the bladder to remove all appropriate moisture, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder.
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle and pierce it roundly through. then pour out the strong thread into these punctures, then assemble the circle as one assembles a nail, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument.
and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already stated in the division the methods of stone, and their extraction together with medicines;
and have spoken of the difference between stone in the bladder and kidneys, and all the signs, and which stone one should treat with surgery; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the pain from the bladder resembles pain in its subtlety.
and it is often painful, and greatly distresses the patient, and he feels it many times, and then relaxes. and from these jumps the foundations;
and healing is light for children until they are four years old, and greatly painful in the elderly, and is between, for those between childhood and old age.
and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it must first be cleansed by enema to draw all the filth from the intestines. For it obstructs at times in seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and depress and move them out, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and passes once up high.
then make the patient sit between your hands, and their hands be below their thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward.
then he should wound and touch within;
if you feel the stone in the space, you must now incise into the stone.
And if it does not yield to being touched with the index finger of your left hand, make that finger softer by applying oil from your left hand, if the patient is female, or use the middle finger, if the patient is male. and push it to the bottom, and wound the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, apply heat around the neck of the bladder.
then press against your finger, and push the stone where you see it needs to be incised.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch the cions in his right hand upwards, and in his left hand remove the skin which is beneath the cions in the part where the operation is performed.
then pour out the spatumile cupping, of which this is the form: And make between what is between the cions and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh.
and let it be straight over the stone, and his two feet be close to or on the fundament, and let the incision be long from above, wide at the bottom, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
by chance the pressure of the screw which is at the foundation, that it burst without work;
and know that there are stones or angles, and margins: it is cracked to issue;
and if there are stones that are below, resembling a grain, and round, of which the issuance is slight.
For those where there are stones or margins, make the size greater;
and if it does not burst, you must hold it with tongs that are also like a rasp at the top, to move and extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you pour out from under the curved subtle instrument at the head;
and if you cannot do this, widen the little hole a bit, and if the vein is exposed, draw some with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, first pour out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then incise and extract it, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes to pass through him where the kidneys cannot filter it;
but in any case strive to treat, or to disassemble with forceps, until you treat it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bandage it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. then reposition the patient's head on their pillow, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, arise much well the place of oil and water, then treat with ointment of deflacion and basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses or corrosion and clots of blood in the bladder occur in the wound, and it is retained by the urine, which is known to occur in such a manner that without movement with the urine: then thrust your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder and cause corruption.
then lift the wound from water and grease and salt, and aid him in all ways that you see, until he is healed;
and it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, that you tie the two thighs, and apply the medicines to the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is pierced from the urethra, and urine cannot pass; and if the treatment of that which I say thusly requires you to cut many times, it is excused by this treatment. I have experienced this thusly.
Take three iron forks according to this form and fix them in the coals:
then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
push theawl lightly into the vein until it reaches the stone; and turn theawl in your hand at the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on what is stuck from the stone that is within the vein. if it is already broken soon, and jumps with the urine, then the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread over the stone and the other above it, then place the vein against the stone between the two ties, then pull it out, untie one of the threads, and clean the congealed blood from the wound. and let the wound heal until it is healed.
from the stone of women
And it happens that stones form in women, and if it occurs even once, the wound is serious, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
it is one that the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that it is difficult to find a woman knowledgeable who can be trusted, especially if she is chaste.
and the third way is that it happens that one cannot find a woman knowledgeable in this art by hand;
and the fourth way is that the stones in women are more firmly set than those in men, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear accompanies this. And if necessity arises to this, you must seek a knowledgeable midwife, and at points find her, and if you cannot find one, do not seek to use an untrained chaste woman.
and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command concerning the investigation of the stone. and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must seek out her duty or foundation and find the stone:
and if she finds it, she must hold her position by duty, and I recommend that she perform her duty or treat the patient, and place and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, she must move it greatly from great to great along the entrance of the bladder until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, let it be where it appears appropriate, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his hand over the stone or beneath it, and cut it at the first small part;
and do not move his hand over the stone or beneath it, and cut it at the first small part; then insert the probe into the cut, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can come out with force, and know that many kinds of stones are:
this is to know, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
if you know the signs to know the issue.
and if the stone escapes, place vitriol powder at the site, and keep it there for an hour until the stone is dissolved.
then return to your work, until the stone is removed, and have with you the instruments I said in the extraction of the stone from people to help you in your task;
and if it goes through the eye, and this is due to the artery being cut, put the powder on the wound and the ointment of tin and linen, and do not reopen this wound, and leave the stone untreated, lest by chance the patient die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the strength returns, then return to your work until the stones are healed.
Aqua vitae is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white spirits, which are found outside the hearts of coconuts, that contain the essence.
and it is called "syphac," and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is the other egg. and it is the skin of the yolk between the white syphac that we have said.
and this happens rarely. And the generation of this fluid is due to weakness that comes from the yolk, and this matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from striking the shoulders, and this moisture has many colors. or it is colored declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to know this condition, for if it is white syphac as we have said, it is an abscess well formed, somewhat long like the figure of an egg, and does not dislocate the shoulders, for it has moisture throughout.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, the abscess is incised with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought that it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the white yolk, one feels it well;
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you must probe with the entire probing instrument, as described earlier. According to what comes after the introductory part, judge of what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be cleansed according to our power and the condition of his body;
then place the sponge on his back, above one thing slightly high, and put cloth over him;
sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart.
then take the spatumile [a tool for cauterization], and scrape the skin of the heart from both sides long until near the edge of the knife, and let the cut be straight by scraping the skin of the heart down to the white surface, and cauterize subtly according to your power.
then pierce the white surface completely with a large needle, and extract all the fluid, and then place your fingers, and lift the white surface upward.
and do not touch the heart itself, but only the white surface. cut the whole or by pieces himself properly the side of him subtly, if you do not cut it thoroughly, then the liquid will return;
and if the egg jumps during your work, you must reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the cheek.
then join the two flaps of the heart incision with a suture, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the veins that are suspensory, in case of blood loss.
then cut the heart entirely from the suspensory parts, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if an ailment is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you treat the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and apply moistened wool in rose oil to the wound;
if you treat the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and apply moistened wool in rose oil to the wound; and apply other moistened wool in wine and oil, and place over the two joints, and put double-folded cloths above, and bind them securely with the bandage according to this form:
and take two cloths, and fold them with moistened torn wool according to this shape, and sew them together at the waist of the breeches. One head of the shoulder place on the fundament down to the back, and the other to the arm part;
and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the restraint be gathered in the loop of the arm.
and sometimes this branch of the fire cautery is medicated instead of iron branding, and you should use a fine surgical knife, scrape off the hair from the joints, and heat it as we have said, so that the white fat containing the liquid is revealed.
if you use the cautery in this form, and puncture that fat at the inches, and brand it with this fine hot cautery.
And scrape thoroughly in all ways until you dry it out completely.
and make sure that the fire does not touch the eye.
and know that this work is more dangerous; and always guard against the loss of blood, and know that the operations of cutting;
and if anything contrary happens, or an abscess starts or loss of blood or other things, then treat what opposes you according to what was previously said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this operation because of its horror, then perform a puncture as I have instructed, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said indicate aquouse ramification, then make the patient sit on the elevated seat; prick the abscess in the part opposite to the entire spatumile wide, and place the puncture along the length of the body;
and let the perforations be large so that all the liquid may flow out;
then place cotton on the wound, and bind it, allowing the remaining liquid to flow out, and continue to treat the wound until it heals;
and if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to flow out through the wound's opening, then you must insert a probe or the instrument used for draining in dropsy, of which the form is described earlier.
and enlarge the wound, and know that the liquid will return, gathering together after six months or so. And when it has gathered as described before, then the patient's days will pass peacefully.
Know that in this branch of treatment there is much to fear in various circumstances, for it seems to me that we should act only as much as we must.
And I will tell you the treatment and similar aspects of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the heart, and especially from the kidneys; and it is by chance.
That is to say, by bitter and acrid superfluity that spreads to the kidneys, or by percussion;
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the heart; and find no pain, and it is an abscess causing grief;
and by chance it is an abscess of green and blue color, and sometimes comes from a vein or swelling of the vein.
When it is from a vein, it is known by the arrangement of the abscess hot, when you press with your fingers; and it is not fitting that you touch it.
He who is caused by swelling of the vein is known by its arrangement upon the expression from touching with fingers, and can well make the incision in this manner, and in the other joints. and that you shape the heart of the joints, then place the egg on top, and stretch the tendon of the white surface, and release the suspender from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these cords, then you must stretch the egg, and shape it;
and if it is hardened on the surface, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension, and shape it roundly.
And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut entirely, and the egg extracted as we have said.
And when your work is accomplished, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other salves until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to that of a turban, with the joints being softened, and the patient experiences sudden pain.
and the treatment of this disease is also very careful as in the case mentioned before, and indeed we will tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
You must place the patient on an elevated seat, then apply the suspensory ligament above your two hips, to the vessels close to the groin, and tie them tightly and firmly.
then insert the sharp blade through the vessels sideways, until they are exposed, and then scrape from all sides, as we have said in the extraction of arteries located in the temples.
then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first point where the vein has come out, and tie it again at the other end. then place the cloth centrally straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moistures;
then treat the wound as with others or when drawing blood, so that no vessel constricts any of the joints;
for from this there comes no harm, and if blood flows to all parts, then it is necessary to treat the joints with all parts; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be treated.
The occurrences of this branch are due to the section that comes from syphilis, or extension on the abdomen in the part of the inguinal region, for which reason the intestines descend along that rupture to one of the joints;
and this rupture is either due to a blow, or from its extension, and come in these two ways of manner:
or from a percussion, or a jump, or lifting a heavy burden, or similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the blow, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the back, because the blow presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the tendon, which causes an sudden onset of pain, and the abscesses appear varied and beneath the skin, because of the discharge of the intestines and the core below the tendon.
And sometimes the circles with the intestines, and are retained within, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these treatments with iron, for which it is advisable to avoid.
And the way of the work is that you instruct the patient to warm the intestine from within in the wound with their hand, if it can enter. then treat his collarbone, between your hands, and straighten his thighs;
then apply the cure to the upper part, and shave all the hair from the length of the spine; then insert the points of the knife into the sides of the wound according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the intestines may easily protrude;
then cauterize the sphincter muscle beneath the spinal cord, until the white sphincter becomes completely uncovered from all sides;
then insert your index finger where the spinal cord ends, between the white sphincter muscle beneath the spinal cord skin, and between the second sphincter, and separate what is behind the egg and between the second sphincter;
and when you move it with your right hand inside the heart of coins, and place the white egg on top at the back of your left hand, lift the egg towards all sides of the forehead; and instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament;
and seek with your fingers if it has any part of the intestine enveloped or hard white egg, and if you find anything, put it back inside the abdomen;
then take a needle with a thick thread made of many strands, and put it in the back part of the egg, which is after the skin of coins; after the incision, then remove the heads which appear with threads, until there are four threads; then join them one over the other in the shape of a cross, and place it under the skin, which we have said is beneath the skin of the shoulders, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the heads with threads, and bind them firmly with a strong thread of two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter, preventing an abscess from forming. and bind again as with the first long thread around two doits of that size, and after these two threads, leave a space under the skin which is beneath the heart of the shoulder of one doit. and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carried;
then apply to the part which is under the scrotum, until the testicles return to their normal position, and the bowels, as we have said before.
then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and bind it with the ligature as we have said. And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent excessive bleeding after incision due to doubt. For this often happens, and leave the ligature until it dries by itself;
and if it does not fall off on its own, remove it with hot water, and place on it what we have said until it dries.
then treat the wound with another dressing until it is perfectly healed.
of fatty hernia
In this case, I have never known anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the twigs bound together with a wire, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly away.
then apply it to me, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels cease.
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there comes a rupture in the groin, as we have said, and open the thighs.
and do not let any of the intestines touch the coion, and if they do touch it, it is only a little, and replace them every hour.
and if it remains too long in this position, the wound or syphilis will worsen, as the intestines swell.
and this occurs due to the extension of syphilis which is at the roots, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells the lymph and opens.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have already said.
and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then hold the head from the swelling of the torn area wide according to the quantity of three nails.
and then extract the syphac that is beneath the skin, then take the root and place it over the apparent part of the syphac.
and press it towards the front of the abdomen, then stitch the two apparent parts of the syphac above the root of the syphac, and stitch both separately.
then extract the root of the syphac, and do not cover or extend the egg or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the ramifica of the intestines. then treat it as you would treat wounds.
then treat it as you would treat wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The swelling is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauteries are moistened in this place, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin around the knees
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some people, because the tissues within are softened, and it must be seen.
and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to make the patient lie on their back and scrape off the soft tissue that is softened over the natural skin;
then sew the two edges together with a stitch, and if you wish, firstç¼åˆå¤šä½™çš„è½¯ç»„ç»‡ä¸‰æ¬¡æˆ–å››æ¬¡ç‰¢å›ºåœ°ã€‚ (Note: The last part of this line is translated loosely as no exact equivalent in Old French to "IV" exists naturally in the language for counting stitches. A more accurate translation would be to keep the number as it is, but this might not make sense in English without additional context.)
then scrape between the stitches, and treat the wound as other wounds until it is healed, and cut the thread.
by due chastisement
Know that castrations are forbidden by our law, and because of this, I shall not speak of it in this book.
and is necessary for two reasons:
because one reason is that the patient can know how to respond when asked and know about the treatment;
and the other, because we often have need to restrain some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and dogs and other animals.
I therefore say that restraining is done according to two methods: or by attraction, or by splitting.
In that method where we do it by attraction, place the animal in warm water until the tendons become softened and then proceed; then hold them with your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel pain.
Of the castration of the tail: it is necessary to castrate the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each epididymis with one cut, when you have well scorched them;
and let some of the suppurate and the subtle humor that is in the vessels.
and this method of castration is more effective than that done by attraction, for in the case of attraction, there may remain some of the testicles, which causes the beast to desire lust.
then treat the wound while it is healthy.
Of hermaphrodites
Hermodiae is according to two manners in men: one is that between the two kidneys it appears as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in the course of urination.
And the other method is for women, and it is done with a knife as with a rod and two fingers.
And the treatment for man and woman is that you clean all the wounds thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds.
In the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the kidneys, there is no treatment.
Tentingene is a wound that appears on the natural part, to such an extent that it is too ugly to see. and some women have them as large as a hand, and these are the cures.
It is necessary that you dye the excess of the wart with your hand or on the nails, and apply it lightly;
and do not make it too hot, for blood flow should not occur, and continue the treatment until it is healed;
and for another sore that arises at the corner of the mouth, cover it, and by chance it may burst, and it resembles a cow's hoof, and because of this they called it in ancient times "cow disease. If it is necessary to apply it, as we have said regarding the texture and treatment until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the ulcer is small; and is by nature, or accident due to illness that has come upon them;
and is by nature, or accident due to illness that has come upon them; or it is by sharp injury, or from a thin or thick needle, and is made in flesh, or in the ribs, or beneath, or anywhere else;
and protects conception, childbirth, and by chance the flowers to be had;
and the knowledge of these is through the sight of the bale.
If the swellings are nearby and apparent, feel with your fingers or touch them.
If it is from a thin needle, and it is near the two flanks, hasten, and remove it thus:
place your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
then the two flaps are formed so that the delicate tissues become soft and over the stoppers;
then take wool, and marrow in oil, and put it on the wound, and let the woman rest in a prone position each day so that it does not heal too quickly.
And if the blister is hard and thick, it is necessary to cut it with a scalpel resembling a bay leaf.
If the stoppers are of living flesh, suspend them at the inch and half.
and use blood-stanching medicines such as aloe, dragon's blood, incense, and in abundance egg yolk.
then apply a broad bandage, so that the wound does not heal.
and let it grow long, and give him a tent of dry linen;
then continue to treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
And when carbuncles bring forth pus, one must treat it according to this manner, unless it is an embedded abscess. For the embedded abscess in the carbuncle, one must not touch it to incise.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not normally occur, and when hemorrhoids are old they become ulcerated.
and we have already stated in the division of signs from auscultation, and the signs themselves, and I will now say those that receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when fully inflamed in the carbuncle, do not appear by touch; only those cured with iron can be seen.
Those who are at the mouth of the boil, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then apply the ulcer to tongs, and cover it with its roots, then dust it with blood-restraining medicines, such as aÃ§aÃ­, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things.
then keep his feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse them in cold water;
and if bleeding continues, make him sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranate peels and galls and similar things, then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and basil, and apply it as a poultice to his back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury.
then take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess has come to head, treat the place with ointment until it heals.
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head; one should treat it as I said for the theorem. and then the treatment until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the armpit, such as chancre, stone abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases as I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the abscess of heat that comes from the liver, which is not among those abscesses that boil.
and if you wish to know the iron work, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it; let it mature until the pain is alleviated.
and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small seats where he can recline, and support himself on his back and align his feet with the lower part of the leg;
and spread his thighs, and place his arms over his knees, and tie them well with a firm band.
then place the fire against the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the mouth of the maris there, of which we will speak later.
and it must be that when you see the instrument being brought there, you insert the first probe to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not blind the patient. and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with strips of cloth, so that the instruments do not harm it;
and it is necessary that he place the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and it is made soft by hand, it is necessary to cover it with lint, or a clean cloth.
And when the boil is drained, it is necessary to place moistened cloths in rose oil, or in green bile oil.
and place the cloth firmly over the depth of the wound, and put above the wound and on the blade clean moistened cloth in water or cooked herbs.
then apply the cure after two days of ointment, until it is healed;
and once a day raise the swelling and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and rue that are cooked. then continue with the ointment.
And if the wound is placed at the sore, you must guard against using iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first to know the natural childbirth process and its signs, and these signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the water.
then hasten the birth to proceed. then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and the baby comes out with its head, and the next one follows with it.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his abdomen so that the child comes out quickly;
for when he descends from his head, the midwife attends to him with him, and the fetus is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing;
and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
for he comes sometimes on his feet, and comes forth into the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or he comes on his abdomen or side, and is turned by chance over his neck, and by other evil shapes.
it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should assist them.
If the child comes to his head naturally, and the woman gives birth easily, and the virtue of it is weak, then let her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her;
and let its nature of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour the bath between his two small spatumiles as they are formed. and cut the secondine, and scrape away the moisture that is within.
and insert her abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then administer a douche to the woman with fenugreek seed oil and olive oil.
then let her breathe deeply and exhale slowly, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. if you now treat the child.
And if both hands feel weak, you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, you place the woman on the stool and lift her feet up high; then place the stool on the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not move during the resetting;
and if the hand cannot enter and the child has died, you cut the hands with the knife that was placed in front, extract the child, and reset them equally.
from the extraction of the child from her feet and when the child comes to its feet, you must lift it up high; and then file little by little, until they are equal;
then take hold of the pieces and stretch them little by little.
Can it jump to the knees, if commanded, and make it sneeze by coughing; if it jumps, may God will it.
And if it is not worse as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is lightly.
And if it does not jump as we have, say take a piece of althea, and silk worm gut, and melted gum, and grind them all in the mortar; and put the nature of the woman inside and under this ointment, then make her sit in hot water until below the ribs.
and when it is softened underneath, make a collar of myrrh, put it under, and let it remain for an hour; then place it on the seat, then make it sneeze and hold its mouth and nose, and gently rub its belly, for the child jumps now.
from the issue of the child above his knees When the child comes into this form, put its hands down little by little; then support it on its neck, and let its feet hang down, and lay it supine on the bed; and bend its arms little by little, and then place its hands on the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until it is positioned hanging down. and if the child does not come forth, take his feet and twist them, then twist his belly upwards, then put your hands there; and let the child come forth little by little; and instruct the woman to push hard until the child comes out.
from the issue of the child who comes with one hand wide open it is necessary to devise a way to bring the hand back: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and proceed;
if she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, and twist her legs forcefully;
then administer the muscle ligament as I have described;
and if she does not give birth, place her on the seat, then strive to bring back the hand; and if the birth proceeds according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain until the fetus passes.
of the issue of the child from its neck, and let her spread her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back It must be that the bailer holds the hand, then turns it little by little, and the woman lightly;
and when it is equal, place the natural muscular texture of flax and oil on it, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
and when you have done this, place her on the seat, and command her to strain; and make them sneeze. in this same manner for all the secondine
in this same manner for all the secondine When it comes to forcing in this manner throughout the scrobiculus, scoop out the scrobiculus with your finger until the moisture is evacuated;
and if the fetus can be seen on its face and on its neck, scoop out the mouth, ensuring it is not retained, and the fetus will die.
then place the child back inside, ensuring you position it properly, and instruct the woman to urinate once.
of the issue of the twins Know that gemelli often appear, and sometimes there are three or four of them. and this is not a strange thing, and happens little. They are strange things, and do not live, if at all;
They are strange things, and do not live, if at all; I know these things, which multiply and are severed by the syphax that devises them, which is attached to the mouth;
and sometimes they come out naturally like small grains, as we have said.
And if they come out smoothly, the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle fumes do quickly and lightly what they do; and let them act as they are worth for the sake of healing. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the barber-surgeon know all this, for similar things may happen to him. it must be done according to what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman who has died with a stillborn child or is pregnant, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are constrained to perform manual operations; it is fitting that you know whether the woman is in good health, and has no complications or fears of death.
if it is necessary to treat the woman on her back, and let her shoulders inclined downward, and the legs elevated;
and the attendant place her in two parts, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated during the child's descent;
then rub the mouth of the patient with moist oils mixed with almond extract and fenugreek seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and extracts.
then gently place them on the patient, then choose a place where she lies down that is suitable for this, and see to it that the child is prepared to descend onto her head.
if the thorns pierce their eyes or neck or mouth or in the palate or under the beard or in the armlet or near the ribs, and if the descent is on stones, they are pierced or stabbed at the middle of the ribs;
and it is necessary for you to hold the thorn in your right hand, and place the pincers between your left hand's fingers, and gently squeeze with all your hand, and pierce the thorn into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the thing empty.
then pierce against the other thorn, or use the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal.
and then extend equally by moving on both sides to allow it to come out, and let the teeth hold it to move, as is shown in the figure:
And if a part of it remains, apply some of its own eye to that part, and draw out the other part;
And if there remains no part, place this tooth higher up, and do so until it is completely removed.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to the strain, you must envelop it with a cloth until it comes out completely. then place the cloth at the joint of the sole or on the cut, and do so with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and narrow at the opening, or if there is an acute swelling gathered, then you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, cut the swelling, and extract the acute swelling; or you must do it with the instrument called "almidach," whose name comes from the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and in the same manner do it if the infant has a large swelling naturally.
and then cut the bones with the tongs, and if the head dislocates and is held in place by force, then split it until the moisture that has gathered is released.
and if it cannot come out, cut it away piece by piece where you can.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the back, you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the injury is on his feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the artery is light.
And if it is swollen in the belly or near the buttocks, you must extract it with a flax cloth enveloped around the hand. and make a incision in the belly or near the buttocks until the moisture flows out.
and if the other limb is amputated and the shoulder remains, use a flax cloth soaked in mustard to hold it, and cut it until you reach the opening of the mustard. then one or two drops of vinegar are applied;
and if the aperture of the sore has become narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come to it, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances; and one applies plaisters, and soaks the area in mild and moistening waters.
And if the injury is on his side, and you can place it evenly, apply what we have said for a living child.
and if we cannot do so, apply the vinegar in pieces, and let nothing of the sore remain.
And when you have done this, apply to him what we have said about pus-filled abscesses that come in the loins;
and if the bleeding continues, it should be placed in cold water, and other treatments should be applied.
And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then sutured the other [one] above it, and caused the death of the other. After long time, an abscess formed in the buttock, and swelled so much that it opened, and caused great pain.
I was called for the treatment, and I thought long, and could not hold the wound.
I applied a plaster of strongå¸å¼•åŠ›ï¼Œå¹¶ä»Žä¸­å–å‡ºäº†ä¸€äº›éª¨å¤´ï¼Œå‡ å¤©åŽåˆå–å‡ºäº†å…¶ä»–ä¸€äº›ã€‚ I marvelled greatly, for the abdomen has no bones.
I thought that these were the bones of a dead infant.
I cleaned the wound, and handled the bone, until the woman was in better condition; and I kept the woman long thus, and it was a little better for her;
and I have recorded this chapter only because when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
Next comes the form of the presser, to which one applies the books;
and at two turns of the head of the two shoulders. All in all, the horns should be finer than the restricting tube, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be two fingers wide, and the margin of the branches a finger and a half long; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same tube, firmly fixed in both, about half a palm long or a bit more;
and these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the tube to open it when turning the two horns.
Another form, of its kind more delicate and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and may have at the two heads two joints, as you see, of a palm's length, and two holes of width;
and when you see open the socket with the entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two joints of the instrument together into the socket, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the equal tongs, according to the quantity that you see needs to open the mouth of the socket, so that the bail does what it should.
This instrument is entirely surmounted, and its likenesses are multiplied; and when the mirrors are aligned, the work is done more quickly, and higher for their quantity.
If you do not use the instrument without having prepared it, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to bear her pain, and then make her snort with condisi, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose; and if she passes it through this, well done.
If this does not work, take iodine or a stopper, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the fetus, such as calamus, rue, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water on the fire;
then put a cane or pertus into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the jar, sealing the jar tightly so that the vapors enter the jar.
then make him sneeze, as we have said before. If the second joint moves hastily.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not cured, command the lady to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or castor oil, then put it back on the wound, and try again. and when she has found it, take it out and stretch it little by little straight, so that the jar does not break during extraction.
but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then treat; if it comes and dislocates again.
And if the opening of the nostril is narrowed, we have said the treatment for sneezing and fumigating with herbs;
and if it is not of all that we have said, be sure you do not go astray in treating;
but what is at the opening of the nostril, you should tie it to the thigh of the woman, then catheterize with an ointment enema of four ingredients; and if it relaxes and recovers, it will come back to normal.
but whenever she [the condition] causes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and nauseates the patient. then it is necessary to perform suitable fumigations for this.
none of the ancients have proven the fumigation with cabbage and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
And it appears similar to a cane, and one places the fine head inside, and the larger heads above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the scabies until it is damaged, and then begin another.
Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but have it stopped by fine stoppers. if therefore the bail must pierce this side in its proper place, and not at all through the sharp sphenoid bone, and guard the ligament so that it does not touch;
then put on moistened linen in wine and oil, and treat with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will close up again, place or keep a bandage of lint, and let it remain for a while, and be removed when the child seems ready to go into rooms.
And sometimes this plug comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be cauterized suddenly: if it needs to be treated, as we have said for the scab.
Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodations, and grow larger than those that come from the fundament breaking open, or in the space between two parts, for one fistula or more.
and when that nodulation is old, it works, and introduces moist white or subtle bile, and sometimes these Persian fistulas occur.
and they are known when there is an evacuation or windiness when the patient has a bowel movement, and by accident from a jump or fall.
And if the fistulas drain to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and they reach to the hip joint, and to the knee.
And thus one knows the Persian fistula in the anus, and not in the anus. and it is that you place your index finger, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
and if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin catheter of lead, or horsehair, as long as you feel the catheter or hair with your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge nor wind or bile, as we have said: know that it does not reach the fistula; if you hasten to treat it.
And when the fistula is infected up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, then the urine jumps out, and cannot be healed by medications.
if it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the catheter comes from that place. if there is no twisting and the cause of the pain is within, it is set in place by the side, and neither medicine nor sudden application of ointment helps.
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of foolish people who undertake them.
For those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back.
and the patient lies with their legs extended up to their thighs, and their thighs inclined towards their abdomen. then place a tent of lint or gauze, or of flannel if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent should come.
If the patient feels pain deep within the pelvis, you should place your index finger there; if then you sense that the tendons have pierced it;
and if you discover that it is open where you feel between your finger the saphenous vein or the flesh, then you know it is pierced; if there is no work done, it cannot be healed.
One can certainly cure some cases well, but this happens rarely.
And the aid that is done, it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and let the hot oil flow in the fistula until it comes from the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred threads are burned, which resemble the feathers of a bird.
and then dress the wet wounds with butter, until the charred threads are removed, then dress with ointment healing the flesh and closing the wound.
If it is thus healed, that is well.
If this, name it otherwise cannot be cured;
and if the tent passes through and does not pierce to the depth which is the fundament, and between your finger and the tent place a thick cover of flesh or flax, and you will see the fistula for him who removes the cover in its proper place. if the head of the fistula begins to swell, apply it before the tent, and cauterize after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be relieved, and fall;
then demarcate those charred areas that seem like anbird's feather, and let no part remain.
And if the healing fails, and cuts between you and the work, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
For the fire cauterizations combine two good things: that is to say, the burning of these added chars, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture;
then the treatment of tents soaked in butter or ground hemp, until the eyes exude fluid, and remove the charred parts in the fluid;
then dress the wound with oily salves hardening flesh, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
And if the fistula comes just to the point of the foundation and is distant from the body, set a bone or foundation, and inquire about it.
If you feel the wound, and within it is cloth or sponge or flesh, or it is ready to be pierced, then there should be no other way but that of faith and hope, through the administration of one of three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cleanse it until the bottom, or if you can, insert cloths and dress it as first.
and do not overheat too much that you cleanse the cloth that holds the bottom, causing involuntary evacuations. then dress it as we have said;
then dress it as we have said; By chance it may be cured, or you remove that cover and cleanse it since it is rotten from the foundation, or by probing or with another pointed instrument. then cleanse that flesh wound which is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part below the foundation:
then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part below the foundation: if it is a moreè½»å¾®çš„äº‹ç‰©äºŽç—…äººã€‚
And sometimes they make fistulas in this manner: and it is when you probe the fistula and it is located close to the foundation beneath the skin, then take a probe made from horsehair according to this form: And you wind the thread twice around it, and insert the needle with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is a Persian in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that perforated one, so that you place your finger on the foundation.
and extract the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold them one to another, and let it one day or two.
and hold them once, until the threads cover these parts that are between the two, and contract.
then treat the wound until it is sewn and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, make it puncture in all the ways that you can, provided it is not too deep. For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if too deep, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
The form of the spinous spumifer is very acute and sharp on one side. and on the other side not, for what should not be covered is not, as you see here:
Dislocations are according to two manners: or they are within the bone, as a grain of resin, and there may be small and large ones, and within it is blood, and there may be one or more, and they are beneath the bone and on the head of the bone;
but those that are beneath have little moisture, and within or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment of those who have them within the bone, is that you instruct the patient to remain in bed until the bone heals, and then the bones will be apparent. If you hasten it, and pin it with tongs or hold it with your nail, then cut at its roots;
and if the veins cannot be held due to their moisture, take them with flax, or cotton, or a piece of linen; and extract them with both hands, then cut at their roots, and sprinkle with some warm powders suitable for the fire cautery; or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, and continue to treat them with other dressings until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot come out, apply a cauterizing plaster of biting and harsh composition to wash away what is at the fundament, so that it may come out clearly; If the patient complains, and if the threads are torn from the foundation, then the cure is light.
If the patient complains, and if the threads are torn from the foundation, then the cure is light. And it is that you draw them with your finger or tongs, clamp them, then cut them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with a blade. If you must administer theç¼åˆ according to this manner:
If you must administer theç¼åˆ according to this manner: take a thread and put it through an needle, then draw the thread over and pierce the needle on the other side, turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be made large.
and hold the thread taut, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood.
then place a moist flannel in oil of roses or cerate on the base, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
and let it be until they dry, and when they are dry, remove the ointment and other treatments until he is healed.
of dry the wound or foundation Many times, there is a dry fever in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, when the disease is old and medicine does not help. Then you must reset it at the point of a spike or with your nail, which should not be left moist. and cure it until he is healed as it should be.
and if he cannot be healed, renew the fomentation more strongly than before until it heals and becomes scorched. then treat until he is healed.
of trembling A formice is a small feigned appearance on the body, and goes very quickly away.
and sometimes the true fever strikes, and one feels it like a chill, and it comes throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from an ostrich feather, or a very fine swan feather, and place the quill on the chill, so that the red circles completely surround the chill. then turn your hand around the quill until you have completely surrounded the chill, and treat it thoroughly, and root out the chill from its roots.
And if you see, do it with a stick of spider web or iron according to this form, and make it thin underneath and drawing over: ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.
And if you see, cauterize the larynx, as is described in the chapter on cautery.
Any time a silver or brass enema, or melted iron or bracelet;
and any time one uses these instruments, large and small, according to those who use them. Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the joints are fastened in this manner:
and let there be an incision or the abdomen be tied, as you see, and the head be pierced within.
and let there be two perforations on one side, and one on the other.
and let the abdomen be filled with medicines using a bladder of an animal or parchment, and be pierced entirely through with small perforations. Each puncture should have an eighth part of an inch, then insert a strong thread twisted ten times or so into each, and sew up the abdomen as if it were a sheep. and when the medicament is inside, squeeze it out from the instrument with a strong thread, then apply a cataplasm;
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicament neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cataplasm with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then apply it lightly. and the minister should hold it with both hands until it is thoroughly warm, then remove the cataplasm, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicament wishes to come out, let it do so as much as it can. and if it sleeps all night, it is greater help.
And if you blisterize in sickness of stomach discharge, and the medicine hastens to come out, then renew it until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoid is or foundation, or abscess, let the clysters also be as subtle as for a child;
and it is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is compressed:
We have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds;
or we will speak of the treatments for hands and medicine, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the parts or places where they are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the strike of a stone, and sword cuts or knife wounds, or lance, rod, or arrow, or similar things;
or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone blow or similar things, and the skin is altogether torn and the wound large, and you slightly doubt an abscess. if you make it soon healthier of the cephalic part itself if little blood comes from the wound, and let it heal otherwise at the broken part.
and avoid giving the patient excess of wine and large meats.
And if it does not wish to heal, let its flesh be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, if abscesses occur and come up, only wet cotton in rose oil or in styptic wine.
And if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and has not dried by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
And if the fire has dried it, place on some ointments until it heals.
And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, stitch them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, regarding stitching.
If the wound is open to the bone and penetrates, and holds together only by a little, suture it. then dress the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as similar things.
And if you find rotten skin and it does not affect the bone, cut out the rot, apply fire, then dress it;
and if there be an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be staunched by medicines, ligature the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
and if these wounds are small and simple, the dressing is light: and that is when you put this powder which seals as if the arsenic had moistened it.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense, part of it; anddragon's blood two parts; and quick charcoal three parts, and make the powder fine. Apply it to the wound and tightly close it so that it dries well and joins with all its blood.
and then pack it well, and leave it unsutured, if it does not swell. for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with just wax, when one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but lets the mercury moisten the wound.
And if the surgeon has closed the wound while it was still bleeding, one should not put this powder there.
but apply some digested ointments, or pulses of flour of barley made with water and honey, until it exudes pus; then continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is at the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
And if it is the nerves, there is no other way but to continue the treatment and not put any constrictive things, for they harm the nerves and cause them to wither; and do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but let the medicines be warm, such as charcoal washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cotton washed likewise in sweet water and other mine stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, stitch and bind it with bandages, then treat until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce them or lower the opening.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, dress it, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the nerves, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes, then sew the nerve over the cord of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form. and then hold it in place, and let it alone for some days, then cure it with ointments until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then treat it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and leave the rest until the wound rots, and let the pus drain out;
and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a sinus, the treatment should be as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a spear wound or a knife wound, and the wound is deep, then examine if from the wound there are any signs of fainting in the patient. then know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder or tie it up in the first hour, for fear that the blood does not fill properly and returns to the heart, killing the patient. but apply an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day.
and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to drain away the moisture, and let the patient sleep over it for three days, or four, or more. if no spasm, nor bad trembling of the heart, nor any dislocation occurs; and when you see good progress, know that the wound is saved. Cure then and with other treatments until he is healed;
and if it cannot heal, operate, and then know that there is a fistula;
and let the wound heal as it should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then the treatment of what is in front; and if it is large, to suture;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has cut pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester, and alleviate the extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
for the rupture of the belly
The dislocation of the abdomen is large and medium and small;
of the great wound if at any time the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, are affected.
and the suturing is more difficult, and at any time it is worse than a small wound, because one cannot easily put the intestines back in place, unless one rewets them repeatedly.
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and cannot be put back in place easily, and for this reason, it is better to leave the smaller wound, because one must first reset the intestines in their place before treating the others.
And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to four ways:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the abdomen, and the sutures of other bodily wounds, and these two other sutures are common to other wounds.
and all these are more proper with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say each one and clarify.
I say that when the wound is small, and no intestinal matter is present, and there is nothing to suture, it can be done in one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it by placing it in a suitable manner: Soak a sponge or a soft cloth in cold water alone, or boil them in water with squinant, cypress, and spike, and rub the intestines until the swelling is removed;
And once this restraining wine is made, and it has been macerated to remove the swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestines with water or boiled and mallows, for by these the entry is facilitated with only a little.
And if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids.
And the first dressing should be changed when the wound is healed, for we should not cut into it without great necessity.
and these are the instruments to cut with:
if you cut inside the curve and above it, note this form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have protruded, replace them backward according to their natural form in their proper place if you can, for this is correct.
When the wound is large and it is in the lower part near the abdomen, you must place the patient on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part near the abdomen, place their head and buttocks higher than the other parts, and similarly, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two parts, ensure that the severed part is higher than the other.
and thus you must apply what I say to large and medium wounds.
For small wounds apply what is prepared for you, then have in your hands the minister thyme which fills all the wound with its hand, andç¼åˆä¼¤å£;
and this is the common way of suturing, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave at the edge of the wound a piece of silk thread, and put in the needle with good strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two ends of the thyme, which is beneath the skin inside, as deep as you make that part pierced, and sew the two edges of the thyme together.
then sew with a doubled thread between the needle from both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound properly, and then leave another piece of silk thread, and put in another needle;
then draw the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing this according to what you need from the needles until all the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and large, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too large ones do not enter well at all. for that reason they should be medium-sized;
and it is not right to insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, for they will cut and widen the wound before suturing.
and then cut the heads of the needles, so they do not bruise the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them from moving, and leave them there until the wound is sutured.
and this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one needle or two.
The second suture is common, and it involves sewing together the two sides of the skin and the two layers of flesh with one strong middle thread.
and when you have pierced these edges all four together, withdraw the needle to the part where you began, in the manner we sew cloth.
and place an interval of the thickness of one small finger between each suture.
This suture suits the hand, and I sewed a wound on a man's abdomen that was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width in size, with intestines protruding about two palms' width, and it was located in the abdomen.
I restored his intestines after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
And those present had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and did not treat him with ointment, for I was in the place where none could be found, and no medicine was available; and applied old cotton to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and thread it from the outside to the inside;
when it has pierced the core straight through, leave the end of the suture or stitch or where you threaded the needle, and have it pierce from the inside to the outside.
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the tanner does with hides, and you leave once the seam on one side, and replace it on the other, until the stitch is entirely completed.
The second method of sewing, as Galen describes it properly, is such that no one does it, where they assemble the two parts naturally and apply one end of the seam to the other end in such a manner:
Insert a needle or end of the thread into the middle, and pierce only that side, leaving the two ends of the seam. then turn the needle, and pierce from the outside part all the way to the inside part, through the two ends of the seam.
then pierce both from below up to that within, in two other heads of the shoulder on the opposite side.
and this is the main way and the most common method of stitching.
Galien said this word, and none testify, we must stitch the belly with two needles, with thread in each.
and one must sew the needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who stitch wounds.
and know that when the wound is in the belly, the stitching is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as the surgeon has made it bleed, you should apply the intestines and the cloth;
then apply the powder to promote healing, and if the surgeon has caused it to bleed, then apply any ointment that is at hand until the wound heals; and stitch the threads, and let the sutures be joined, and the mirrors; then treat the wound as with others until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, then apply old cotton as soon as it begins to heal, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound communicates with the principal members, then it is necessary that you apply a light lint in temperate oil, or in rose oil, and place it between the layers, and under the flaps;
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this often happens, then use enemas of black terebinth wine, especially if the putrefaction comes as far as the intestines;
and pierce it internally, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the veins that are in it, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the hernia protrudes from the wound, replace it back as with the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and turned brown or black, you must ligature the vein that is black, to prevent blood from flowing, for there are veins and arteries there;
then remove what is between the ligature, and place the two heads down below the part over the wound until fully for alleviating the extraction when the hernia falls and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the bowel
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, one might be able to restore it in some cases, for I have seen men whose bellies were pierced by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became foul and turned into a fistula, and therefrom came the excretions and windiness;
and I applied care according to what I could, and did not cease to probe until it was healed, and the wounds were sewed.
And when I saw itç¼åˆå¥½ï¼Œæˆ‘æ€€ç–‘ç—…äººè…¹ä¸­ä»æœ‰ç–¼ç—›ï¼› and there was no pain at all, but he improved in better conditions, eating and drinking well.
and the experimentors said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner: take fresh herbs from large leaves, then join the lips of the wound, and when the herbs have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it draws the mouth shut.
and then cover the head, and let it stay so that it cannot be removed, then place another herb in this manner as before, until the wound is completely soaked. and close the wound.
If this happens in the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient, then one can ligature the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
take the end of this intestine thread that is well unscathed, then twist the fine linen thread around its end, then insert the thread into the needle, and suture the intestine, then tie it off at the wound.
and this manner of stitching for coughing is not done except according to the way of hope and expectation;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the abdominal organs, there is nothing no wise person, skilled in such matters.
of fistula or it be Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals over time, is universally called a "fistula," and especially when it is closed and grows back.
And a fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where no pain is felt, and is also as smooth as the feathers of an eye.
and sometimes clear and hollow, and other times thick. sometimes little, and other times sufficient.
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds: that every wound that is not healed and has no flesh, is not done except by one of the nine causes. this is to say, by the small amount of blood or body fluid; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the edges, and does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the eyes are rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is like a plague; or because of the property in the region is slow digestion, and delayed health, and swollen by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or it must be that I tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by hand.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and the arteries, and the nerves, or the face, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and know that it affects the property of the principal limb, and similar ones.
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of serious illness, and there is nothing except labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not yet exist until the point I have said, and you are in charge of the cure, and you see it coming, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, then block it;
and if the fistula is curved, you must seek a fine mesh tent, because the mesh can bend around the curvature.
and if the fistula has ends closed and you cannot properly block it with tents, you must cauterize it through one of the ends, for moisture will flow from one end to another, and cleanse it.
then block it with your power, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is enclosed within. Ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you know truly where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the places I have said, then cover according to what I have said, and remove the false ones and the decayed flesh that are within;
and then the treatment until it is clean, and if the fistula is well deep in the right place, you must cover thoroughly as much as you can. Then put wet bandages in medicinal water, and pour them until the medicine erodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then apply ointments with clean flesh until it is healed;
and if he is not known by them, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then treat.
If the vein or nerve does not affect the main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove all the corruption, and treat the flesh surrounding it until it heals;
and if it does not heal, and the boil returns as before, know that you have not gone far enough;
and remove and clean until you reach the root, and extract all the corruption, then reset it;
and if it is thus healed, that is well. If not, know that the corruption is too advanced, and you cannot remedy it; if there is no other means but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs, do so with an appropriate instrument. And if there are many bones, extract all of them, leaving none.
and if the moisture causes a contrary effect, and there is no mistake or fear, cut, remove the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something corrupting on the wound and let it remain until the bones are rotten within, then the bones will be removed more easily;
And if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, remove the corruption only until the blackness is completely gone, then restore the wound;
And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it reaches the marrow of the bone; And it is necessary to stitch and bandage until the corruption is removed, and then treat until it heals;
And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in the man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man between XXX years and 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, such that the materials came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
but by their folly they opened it too much, and drained a great deal of material from the abscess, and it became a fistula, and many perforations came that all gave off pus and moisture from the body.
and many times they treated it for over two years, and there was no wise person in the art of hands, so that when I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they had treated him, and what drained through the perforations, it stank greatly. and the face about the eye socket became red, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and scraped into one of the openings enough that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and perforated, and the corruption came to the inner part of the bone.
I thought that the corruption I saw in the bone was the only corruption there, but it turned out that what I removed was not all.
and began to dress the wound with medicaments for a long time, but could not heal it.
and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and removed it, and puzzled over how to heal the wound. but I could not completely enter a palm's width of bone, and I had to cut through all its marrow, then restored it with medications; and it was healed and sewed quickly, and it did not seem necessary to restart the work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of death from him. For the bleeding often occurs during evacuation, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone a hard scar formed, and it was well disposed and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take the splint, and extend it to the end of the bone that is exposed, and instruct someone to hold it up. and place another splint of cloth larger than the first splint, and attach it over the flesh that is outside the bone, and extend the end, so that you can treat theè…åŒ–è‚‰å¤–çš„è‚‰ï¼Œæ˜¾éœ²å‡ºæ¥ä½ æ‰“ç®—å¤„ç†çš„ä½ç½®ï¼Œä»¥å…ä¼¤åŠè‚‰ã€‚è¿™æ®µæ–‡å­—ä¼¼ä¹Žæœ‰è¯¯ï¼Œå¯èƒ½æ˜¯ç¿»è¯‘é”™è¯¯æˆ–åŽŸæ–‡æœ¬èº«æœ‰é—®é¢˜ï¼Œè¯·ç¡®è®¤ä¸€ä¸‹æ˜¯å¦ä¸ºâ€œå’Œå°†å¦ä¸€æ ¹è¾ƒå¤§çš„å¸ƒæ¡å›ºå®šåœ¨éª¨å¤–çš„è‚‰ä¸Šï¼Œå¹¶ä¼¸å‡ºæœ«ç«¯ï¼Œä»¥ä¾¿ä½ å¯ä»¥æ²»ç–—è¯¥ä½ç½®çš„è…çƒ‚è‚‰ï¼ŒåŒæ—¶ä¸è¦ä¼¤å®³åˆ°è‚‰ã€‚â€
and place a coal or a piece of wood under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
and it must be such that one can see and feel the corruption, and should also be done again another time.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, uncover all the flesh;
then place the coal under it, and then extend the corruption from one part to another, and let the needle penetrate the length of the corruption as we have said.
and if the corruption is at the joint, cover the corrupt joint, and expose the bone on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but copper.
and if the corruption is due to a knife wound in the hand or a knife wound in the foot, it is very severe; but nonetheless, you must inquire about that corruption and how it presents. and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but ensure that the vein or nerve does not hinder you.
and know that the incisors and the sutures for coppering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. and for this, it must be prepared with each type of operation its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you think about the instrument you will need according to what is appropriate.
The shoulder dislocates either from within, or from without.
and when you have treated the corruption by the application of medicines, and they do not help, then you must operate on that limb until you reach the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient may either recover or die due to greater malice from the defect of the limb.
and the signs are such that the limbs become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, there follows the corruption of limb to limb, and it takes hold throughout the body;
if it is due to haste in applying the copper, and if this is caused by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar ones, then the corruption is at the head of the foot, so apply the copper, and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, apply the copper at the joint, so that the corruption does not spread to the arm.
And if it comes up to the arm, apply the copper to the elbow;
and if it passes through the blade, it is death, and there is no remedy outside that equal to its virtue;
and do so likewise when theè…èš€ comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint;
and if it comes or pierces, cover the entire wound. and if it rises to the thigh, cover at the joint of the knee.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means but to let the patient die.
and the manner of dressing or to cure the limb is that you bind it above and below, extend some ministers one at the bottom ligature, and others ministers at the top ligature, and you cut the flesh which is between the two ligatures about a finger's breadth, so that the bone may be uncovered.
then the dressing or bandage, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin, and cause another injury or abscess.
And if the bleeding continues when you work, cauterize the skin hastily, or put some restraining powders on it.
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable ligature, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man we met:
he suffered a blackness that seemed like burning by fire, and this corruption first appeared on his big toe, to the extent that it affected the entire foot;
and when the honorable man saw the corruption, he hastened to treat the foot, and it was healed;
and many days later, the corruption appeared on his hand again. He came to me, and I placed things that would help after cleansing the body, but the corruption could not be stopped;
and he told me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as I had hope of stopping the corruption; and I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the virtue of the man was weak;
and he completely despaired, and returned to his land, and hastened to have his hand treated, and was healed;
and I included this only because something else should be done, if we need to.
Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh, and stays for so long that it causes a great collection of pus; and then it swells and is pierced, and the pus bursts out, leaving the eyes like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as fine silk, and the pus does not run all the way to the bone or to the nerve. Such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone through the wound, it is called "fistula";
and the skin must be cut all around, and especially when it is delicate, like a cloth. and does not rot due to its corruption.
And if you have reason to believe the skin will rot and the corruption is not through the bone, and the skin is thick with flesh, then incise it thus:
look if the swelling is great, and the vein within it has a foul odor, then use the medicated paste of Egyptian medicine as follows: take aysil, eye, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of these according to your necessity, and make them in water and in honey, and apply a clyster to the side, and hold the wound steady; and let the medicine remain there for two hours, then extract it by pressing;
do this many times, until the side is healed, and the pus removed;
and at any time apply a clyster of water from ashes when this medicine is not present, and use ashes from vine wood, pour water over them, then strain and make into a clyster, until you know that the side is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey or add a little powdered tartar. or cleanse it with honey and wine, where the honey has the property to purify and wash, and the wine causes the healthy part to grow.
and when you have done this and you are certain that the wound is well purified, cleanse it with what causes flesh to grow, and which you apply as a poultice, made with rose oil and wine.
or cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in detailing their properties or to treat ointments.
and if the wound in the chest is small and the wick of the candle cannot enter, enlarge it slightly with a iron, then place therein a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, sew it up leaving just enough space for the wick of a candle or the clister to fit, and if the hole through which the bow was shot is above, cover it with more wax below.
and if you cannot extract the chest wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the arrow runs to the lowest possible point. For when the arrow is fully removed, do not let any flesh remain, and if you cannot extract the chest wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner: that the fluid flows lightly down, and not leave anything of the fluid;
that the fluid flows lightly down, and not leave anything of the fluid; and apply healing medicines over the wound, and place above the linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then apply a poultice slightly larger than the hole in the chest according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound, using another cloth for the poultice as needed. This will help reduce the fluid, but do not remove the large outer cloth for several days at one time.
and the one over the hole in the chest, often remove it to drain the fluid, and know what flows from the fluid, whether it is venom or little, much, or digested, or undigested.
and take heed if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps over the wound of the sound part, know that the sore has begun to rupture, and bring on the health.
and then release the bandage in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound dressing, change the other dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are men who have slow healing of wounds, and among these are those who do the opposite.
and if an undigested mass appears in the wound after many days, know that the sore has not begun to rupture.
and if the breast delays in healing and is distant, apply drying medicines that are dry in substance and moist in virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is a later medicine;
take a diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and anoint it with old wine of equal virtue;
then let it infuse and use it;
and this same made better by cooking it and thickening it, when diaphoretic ointments are not present, or you take myrrh, frankincense, and turpentine, grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is off the fire;
and then I wrap it up, and place it over the breast, and sometimes an Aristologist administers longe and celestial lily roots, which are as fine as wheat flour and cornmeal; and in the use of simples or compounded: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey as I have said, and use it;
and if the wound is long and not treated with this treatment, then know that the corruption is more advanced and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments; if the wound from the treatment of fistula, as we have said before.
Pantarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places.
and when it grows old and one does not take care of it, it comes to form an abscess, spreading and exuding pus until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance they may even destroy the entire nail.
and it causes corrosion up to the bone, causing pain and foulness, making the head of the finger swollen, and discolored.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the remaining nail, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact.
and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick it, and bleed, then you must place a wick under the nail that will lift the flesh and stop the bleeding. Gently and lightly scrape away the subtle flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove everything. then continue with the application of ointments until he is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out, andåˆ®ä¸€ä¸‹ï¼Œè¿™ä¸æ˜¯ç¿»è¯‘ï¼Œè¯·ç»§ç»­æŒ‰ç…§åŽŸæŒ‡ç¤ºè¿›è¡Œç¿»è¯‘ï¼šå¹¶ä¸”å¦‚æžœè…èš€åœ¨éª¨å¤´ä¸­ï¼Œå°±éœ€è¦åˆ‡é™¤ï¼Œå¹¶ä¸”åªè¦éª¨å¤´è…çƒ‚éƒ¨åˆ†å­˜åœ¨ï¼Œå°±ä¸èƒ½ç—Šæ„ˆã€‚
and if you see the bone corrupted, cut it out at its end as is said before, then continue with the application of ointments until he is healed.
and if it is fractured and broken, and he feels great pain, then you must first set it.
then cut the splinter of the sharp bone across, and ensure that the cut does not extend to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, put something on that soothes.
Li must adjust those that arise in the hands of some men by accident and are either all fleshy, or have a division or bones, and sometimes an nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of our bones.
The one that is pricked on any nerve of the hand does not move, and the one pricked at the joint of the hand may sometimes move;
The size of that which is fleshy is light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatumile.
That which is pricked at the root of the joint is grievous to treat: hold it with copper.
In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate tool, and cure it until it is healed.
The symptoms that arise from these injuries come either by birth, or suddenly from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
It is necessary that you cauterize that wound so that it heals according to its natural forms; then place between two cloths or curtains wet with rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you place between two pieces of fine cloth, until the edges are sewn, as it should be.
If the symptoms come with either of these two using the palm [of the hand], cut that sore as necessary.
When his veins are swollen and enveloped with excess melancholic humors, which come from many parts of the body;
and it happens more in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, you must administer one time purgation of colic, and then heal him with the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is where they burn it, and cut or let the black blood flow; and the other method is that you incise the vein, and draw out all the blood forcefully.
The cutting is done in this manner: First, apply the hot iron to the leg very strongly, until the large vessels become thin. Then hold the leg of the patient from below the knee to the part below the knee joint;
Then incise the vein in one place, or two places, or three places, with a wide cut. Then lift and draw out forcefully the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood is released as the patient can endure;
and then ligate it, and instruct the patient to bathe in meat broth simmering with black bile;
and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The alleviation of pain is done in this manner: lift the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and have the patient raise the leg in warm water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it over fire, and then apply it to the vein along the length from the base of the knee to the part below the ankle;
then work the skin with an awl, and scorch the vein from each side until it appears when you feel it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters or through skin it seems as if a white cord is present;
then draw out the rash from under, while it is lifted from the skin, and then apply it gently to another place above three hairs;
then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then apply it gently to the vein, as you have done before, and place it on another small area, as you did first.
then apply another size, or more if you need them, then apply it gently, and place it on the thumb of the foot, then draw and apply it until it reaches the second size.
then extract it piece by piece, until all the force is out, then the cloth;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle at the end of the strong thread, tie it, and pull, and pierce from the side, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out. and make sure it does not stick to the cloth, for if it sticks, you cannot pull or lift it, and this will harm the patient.
and when you have pulled it all out, place wet wool in wine and rose oil over the wound. and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it twistingly, but do not cut it completely; and draw it as we have said before.
The form of iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut completely, but cuts the vein;
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be large as we have said, and here is its form:
This vein is injected into legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
And sometimes it arises elsewhere in the legs, and this happens from rot that comes beneath the skin, just as worms and vermin come within the body, wriggling between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then change the eyes, and begin the vein to issue forth, as one root of a plant.
When the shoulder is dislocated, you should wrap it with a piece of cloth about one and a half fingers to two fingers wide, and tie a knot, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time there is none at the fracture, you should wrap it again with the cloth and the knot.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion back on, and do not cut it off completely at its root, so that it is entirely out. if you do not care for it, it enters into the flesh, and causes an abscess, putrefaction, or loosening, and bad illness;
for that reason it should be treated little by little until healed, and nothing or a scar should remain;
and it is sometimes this vein when treated from the palms of twelve inches, or ten, and one hand's breadth twenty already came to me, from which it issued twelve inches long, and when you treat it, you draw one drachm or pertus, and pierce it thoroughly, so that all comes out;
and let the matter within be evacuated, and apply remedies for putrefaction to the place each day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And sometimes there are many veins, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or hand, and then much blood flows, and from which much pain results;
Cure it therefore as we have said before.
vers which arise between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and moves up and down throughout the body, and one feels it well as it goes from member to member, until it destroys the skin where it goes, and fares evil.
and it is caused by putrefaction of some humors, such as coming from snakes and worms and ascariasis or the intestines.
and if there is doubt or from his malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot force it when it goes:
then it must be that you tie the vein above and below tightly with a strong thread. Then cut and drain it. And if the blood is well out in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is to run through the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the eye, hold firmly over it, then cover up, and pull hard;
and it is necessary to use the patient for the body bath with soluble medicines for the rotten bad humors, and beware of meats causing putrefaction.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member.
and I have seen those who you speak of. I was called to see a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and shortly after, the vein rise up as if by a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, as if living silver when it is cut from another.
the pain departed from that shoulder and pierced into the shoulder, and shortly after spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
then she said that it returned to the shoulder, as I saw.
I wondered greatly how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a way. In every way, I had often wanted them to move the pain from their shoulder to another place, but I did not want it as much as I saw in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a solid core, and her veins were exposed, and thus this wind disturbance became apparent.
and do not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins restored.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, scrape off the top and underneath hastily, and then cover over until those humors are forced out; and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, cure it by those who expel the humors, as bitter pills, and snake bile pills, and similar.
Arrows come in various types, according to their shapes and the parts of the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is such that there are those with large points, small ones, hairy ones, and welded. and of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and that which falls into any limb falls according to two manners: or in the principal limb it strikes, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it falls in any part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: then you must be wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many cases. and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then remove it and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the sypha force which is above the brain fails, is when there is scotomia and sodÃ© and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and if it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects speech and voice; and the pulsation of the wound, moist and white, resembling a pulse, and also as if it were boiling flesh;
and if this sign appears, keep it clean and treat the wound if the arrow is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it hits or pierces the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and one feels it as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulses, and brings out black blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know for certain that death follows.
And the sign of the arrow that never left the body is that without any drops of pus it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes loudly and warms up.
And if the arrow hits in the groin covering, it is near the small intestines; and brings great pain and great sorrow, and sighs; and all the limb moves from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls on the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
And if the arrow falls on the belly, and it jumps out leaving no hay along the intestinal tract, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine sprays out and flows, and the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.
The other limb, as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the humerus and the thigh and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell into his arm at the root of the neck: I extracted it, and removed it from the other side beneath the ear fat, and he was cured without any difficulty.
And I extracted an arrow that fell into the ear fat beneath the paper, and the arrow was embedded, and could only be reached with the point of a staff, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, made of light iron without ears.
the patient was healed, and no bad incidents occurred.
And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow with ears:
I extracted the barbs, and pried open as I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And extracted an arrow from a man who had it in his thigh or belly, and thought he was dying;
and after XXX days had passed, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, treated it, and extracted it, and no bad incidents occurred.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow shot through or over him, and the wound is sewn up;
and the arrow remains inside, and does not change its natural position, nor causes harm to any of its natural functions.
And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow shot through his face, and the wound is sewn up; and remains there causing great pain.
and many other similar cases.
And extract an arrow from a prince, who had been hit among the nerves, and it was slightly inclined to the right side. and the arrow was completely withdrawn.
I was called for the treatment after it had lain fallen for three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I examined it with great care, and did not feel it at all; and there was a puncture and pain over his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed a plaster of digestive extract on it, because the arrows did not cause swelling. and the arrowhead was still in the wound.
and the arrowhead was still in the wound. I applied the plaster for three days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his nose.
and he tells him. I applied corrosive salve to the wound with my fingers as long as it was open, and probed it, feeling the tip of the arrow which was decomposing at the site.
then I adjusted the opening of the wound with the corrosive salve until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
and passed well through the ends within four months, and then I extracted the wound by clamping it with pliers and pulling from both sides, but could not remove it.
then I continued to devise and invent methods with instruments until I successfully extracted it with pliers on one day, as described in the form that will come at the end of this chapter, whatever path I took, and restored the wound.
And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound healed, and the patient was cured entirely.
Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot contain everything;
but the master archers compare but a very little thing, and on what is present and lacking, find nine works, and nine instruments, for the extraction of foreign objects that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are embedded in members or limbs according to two manners: or through the bone where they enter, or by another part;
and that which passes through the bone where it enters, is an arrow entering into its flesh, and passes only once now.
And if it does not pass now, let it be until the flesh rots entirely, and the discharge is relieved;
and if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let it be so for some days, and change each day;
and then it will pass. If it does not pass, pierce through to the whole depth with something sharp, until the arrow is enlarged, and then remove it.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body where it cannot be seen, quit treating it thoroughly. and if you feel it, draw it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do it due to the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, cut it open so that the wound becomes larger;
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has flaps that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is embedded on both sides of the part you can grasp, and then break or bend the flaps of the arrow until you can extract it;
and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you can extract it more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, let it be until the flesh between the bones becomes rotten, then remove it, for the extraction is inflammation. And if the bleeding makes it contrary, administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put something in such a way that you may safely extract the arrow quickly or slowly, firmly or carefully;
and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck, for this is the greatest aid that can be given. And if you cannot do so, then arrange him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where it penetrates any part of the body, or where the skin is swollen such that one can see or feel it apparently:
Cut up high, as long as the forceps can grasp, and then extract: if there is now a jump:
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it there for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, extract it completely;
and if the shaft falls and you see that a push is needed, apply the instrument sideways so that the point of the arrow enters the opening of the instrument;
and then extract it completely. If the arrow is crooked, apply the instrument with its point entering it to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, you may attempt to extract it; if you do.
and beware of extracting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the tweezers used for extracting arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the needle used for piercing is also similar to the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in its form:
Thirty-one veins for extraction are mentioned, of which sixteen are named, that is to say: Two bumps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is on the nose bridge; and the two glands that are in the throat; and the two veins that are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins commonly treated are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the abdomen"; and it is above the femoral vein, and it is the one that is treated, which becomes clearly visible over the groove.
And the ulnar vein is the vein between the thumb and the little finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the left pocket, and the second is the popliteal vein which is behind the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nephros", which is in the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The health of the veins behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the healthier part, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a pin, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head; place your thumb there, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, cut there;
then take the lancette, and make a cut from the vein to the bone, then withdraw your hand above the vein, and scrape away the flesh and vein thoroughly twice through, and let the blood flow until you see it.
then draw and bind it until it is sound;
and I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book.
The disease of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for migraines, headaches, and long-term blindness, and for water tears in the eyes;
and the qualities of this remedy are as I say: and it is that the patient's collar draws out, so that the two veins become clearly visible; and feel the pulse beneath your throat, and then wait for it to change.
then lift the heart above the vein at your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upward, and the cloth, just as you have done with the other two veins, and allow the blood to flow according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put a cloth over it; and then form the incision, and let it be until it is healed;
and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, or the beginning of this book;
The bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is just as effective as the cephalic bleeding for diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness;
and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the veins appear. then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see. then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein tightly until it stops bleeding completely, and do not repeat the operation with a wide flame.
In any case, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too hot; and the flame across, for the bone is nearby, and by chance if the flame is subtle it may burn the bone.
The health of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps them, and with coughing, and with flushing, and with the redness in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is such that diseases escape their core by twisting any one link, as mentioned before.
then the healthy one, and let its health trace a path, somewhat long of flame, somewhat wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are subtle, they may break suddenly.
then let the blood run as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and bind it tightly.
The health of the vein from the root is good for cold, sore throat, and facial diseases, as with migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
and the quality of the health is such that the patient feels pain in his throat, then stretches his neck to your left hand, and takes the fine long flame, and places it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well yet, and the sweat will begin to flow now.
and do not apply it too strongly, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it overnight, for it is very quickly restored.
The health of the two glands helps in narrowing of the alaina, and in the beginning of metrorrhagia, and much to various diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and hydrocele;
and the qualities of health are such that diseases detach their root from both sides, as we have said;
and let the masters be above the patient's head, and the disease set upon the seat, then heal the vein down a bit widely, then draw off the tempered blood, or as much as is needed;
then do the same on the other vein, then release the bandage, and moderately restrain all the veins so that the disease does not choke; and let it be until the morning, so that the wound heals.
Of the health of the glands The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and around the nose and between the lips.
And the quality of the healed state is to seat the patient facing you, and hold their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. They are known by their blackness, and by the small black veins around them:
then prick both of them. And if you do not know them and are in doubt, then prick the largest of each side, and similarly make two veins below and above, for they are of the same kind.
of the health beneath the tongue The veins beneath the tongue aid after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is for the narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the uvea, and diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the healing are that the patient lies with their hand between their legs in front of the sun, and lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side a vein blackens:
heal both, and do not proceed too far forward, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the knee that are commonly healed are treated according to two methods:
or with pricking all with a fine flint stone, or a subtle olive oil as you hear sharp, and is called "anise". and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The form of the flint flame is much renowned, and is wide as you see:
and it has need to open the large veins full of obvious blood, and those containing much blood and impurity; and it is the form of an olive flame:
and is more pointed subtle, and is for cleansing subtle veins, or where there is thin yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that affect the throat, and the collarbone, and the ribs, and the abdomen;
and it is necessary for the patient to bleed and avoid the artery below. And if he wounds the artery and bleeding occurs, it is necessary to stop the bleeding as I have said. and should not be pricked by the flame, but cut like flax.
And if the bile duct does not open clearly, then you must extract it, and replace it with another; or you take none from it, or you heal in its place the vein sent through the arm: it opens clearly; and the cloth with the flax flame, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place to heal, then you must extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the head of the shoulder, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with flame. and be sure not to injure the artery when you see the head swollen, for it is the artery. bind it there.
And if you see it bulge upwards as much as a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is a vein of the artery. hasten then, and place your finger lengthwise, then remove your finger when the vein stops bleeding, for this often happens. bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient.
and for fear, do not let him move until he is healed.
And if the wound is not cleaned and it pains you, and the medicines are not at hand, open the artery if it is exposed, for the head of the arrow is still in. and clean the wound.
And take a bark of the fig tree, cut it, and take one half and tie it well until the next day.
and if the wound is cleaned, that is good. and if not, clean it as we have said, using powders that stop bleeding.
and the applications are not suitable for many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The vein in the middle helps treat the blood of the head above and of the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
and the patient must beware of the nerve beneath, and if it is too deeply punctured, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, the treatment will be unsatisfactory, and by chance, it may not heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and since it is very subtle in some people, you must numb the area with a medicated instrument. and cut the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut along its length.
The treatment of the cephalic vein is beneficial, for it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is better to treat by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle oil, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not cross over any nerve or artery. In any case, it is better to find the lightest vein, and do not damage anything if needed on the first attempt, and then repeat. and sometimes the eyes swell in some people, but even then, it does not damage anything if needed on the first attempt.
The quality of the sinew is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about a surgeon, is that surgery is undertaken only to preserve health and to avoid future diseases;
and let the surgery be done in one of the three veins that are known: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and the surgeon should perform surgery at the beginning of spring and autumn, and after eating in winter, when signs of fullness appear;
and the surgeon should perform surgery on the first or third day after two or three days.
The surgery performed for diseases has no fixed time, but whenever it is needed in the day or night, at all hours and times.
and it is not fitting to treat children up to fourteen years, nor women bearing a fetus from four months until the seventh. Old people who have passed sixty years should not be medicated.
And when anyone wishes to treat them, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that they purge the intestines with a light clyster, if there is little retained bile, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines their foul putrefied matters harmful to the principal members.
nor should they be treated who are too heated by meat, nor drunkards, to such an extent that they are intoxicated, nor dropsies.
and if there is need to treat them after colic passion, vomiting, and belly discharge, and frequent intercourse for women, and travail, and staying up or fasting, and those whose whole virtue, or by a weapon or of the body.
then subtly release the humors, if the swelling is great, through meats and through beverages and through medicines, if you have the power;
then by bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly release the blood, and to cure the vein of the foot between the third toe, as we have said;
and keep him from work, labor, and lust, and similar things;
and be bound and joined, and let the healthier part be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then moderately extract the bandage above, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the swelling;
and then rub the limb with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them;
then moisten the veins with a bit of old oil, then place your thumb on the vein under the limb where you want to cauterize, making sure the vein does not burn.
For there are veins that flow as freely as cords during cauterization, and some are so full of windiness that when you place the flame on them, you must remove it quickly, otherwise, you cannot open the vein, and thus you are among these. and if the vein is opened and the wound is too narrow, then the cauterizer must be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein works the first time, that is good; If not, begin again a little below that place or quickly above, if the joints are not swollen.
And if the joints are swollen, and the patient feels pain, let them rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: by chance abscesses may come up.
do not take a bath, then resume the treatment if it pleases them.
and if the hole is small, or the wound lacks depth, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, so burn right in that hole itself with all the flame directly.
and work a little hastily, so that the lymph be swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the lymph swollen, do not restart the incision, and apply a little oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and the oil makes the lymph that is in this place lighter.
and thus administer the oil in each incision that you make to the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this becomes thick and yellow when it is applied to the lymph. if very fine, let the threads and fibers remain when they are too thick.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is not drained except for that time or the opening of the vein is small, hasten, and place above the lump a moistened sponge in water and salt a bit warm, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the drainage of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days without any black or green discoloration, it does not harm him at all; and if you see, place above it something of aloes or myrrh steeped in calamus juice, mustang's tooth, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance on the skin of the basilica:
Place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of the hand, this is the bad appearance. Hear that you should not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance it could cut an artery;
but make it dry plaster to harden the area, and continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And draw from each of the humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red. and if you see it large, let it continue until it becomes small. and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs blood extraction, that we make the wound larger, and let the flamed be wide;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him to make the wound smaller and more often, and should be made by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this method of treatment is safe from hemorrhage and nerve compression, and is as good as long cuts or wide ones.
and for one whose body requires treatment, it is fitting to give soft bread with pomegranate juice. if it is heated, draw off the blood three or four times. And if it has a cold complexion, eat soft moistened bread in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and lentils, and well-smelling syrup.
And if it swells in the side, after the discharge of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup, and uses the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of vein.
And if it sees fit to let the arm swell and swell again, when he is weakened by great swelling, it is fitting that he be made to swell a little and a little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
And who sees fit to let the arm swell after the first swelling, and if it has strong currents, he should be made to swell seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever is to be healed from another part, must be healed on the second day or the third.
Because it has too much blood in the body which is already heated, and causes fever; if it requires drawing off a great quantity, and widen the puncture until it reaches the vein; then when you satisfy all the conditions for health, and place your hand on his pulse when it is healthy, so that death does not occur due to lack of a vein, and this happens often when the physicians are negligent;
and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated, and cause blood to come out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on it; and if it is curved, that he stretch the arm quickly, for this would be harmful;
but let it be until it heals a second time; or you prick it with the tip of the flame, until the blood from the wound has ceased to come out, and put on a little clean cloth soaked in water, and press gently on it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess subsides.
And if it is necessary to treat the blood a second time, let the vein be in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein on the hand because it is composed.
And the way to do this is for the patient to place their hand in hot water until the fingers turn red.
then tie moderately, so that the vein is clearly visible, then heal now through the middle, not wide nor long.
and let the punctures be wide, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if nothing can come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, do not immerse the hand in hot water, for it is used more in summer than in winter.
and the healing of this vein is more saved among all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the thumb of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method.
strain the hand, and apply hot water, until the vein is swollen, if we see it. and if the vein is across, and you can press it completely through, it will not cause any harm;
and do not apply it too strongly, for the nerve is completely exposed, and then place the hand in hot water if the vein is frozen in the wound and cannot be seen.
And when you have drawn enough blood as needed, put a piece of oil-soaked cloth on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each finger.
The health of the thing in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse (likely referring to a type of abscess or swelling), and do everything as I have said for the right hand.
The illnesses of the spleen are useful for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as liver diseases, retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its vein is such that the patient should pour warm water on it and rub it over the vein until it becomes warm, and tie it above the joint of the foot. and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there flows much blood.
sanitize then or larger wound, or at the ankle, that moves wert.
And if you sanitize on the foot, watch for nerves that are beneath, and sanitize through also as by cutting;
and let the flames ansel.
And if the stone cannot come out, place the foot in the water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the sanitier needs it the first time, repeat it the second time below a bit, for the limbs are salted.
nor doubt of nerve, as we have said, and do the same for the other ankle equally.
The leech for the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the stronger side, and its stone is worth for the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its sanitization is that the patient immerses or bathes in it, and draws it out above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, you should heal it in all ways that you can, and by passing over it; and you should cut it when you copes it, for the joint is loose, and it is very difficult to handle.
and you should cut it when you copes it, for the joint is loose, and it is very difficult to handle. And if you do not find it, heal any vein that opens or is behind the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and place cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
Suctions are made of horns, or of glass, or of iron.
and ventilation is performed according to two methods: or by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this ventilation which is performed without pricking is according to two methods: or it is done with all fire, or without fire.
and ventilation which is performed by pricking and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely at the shoulder. and the other is placed at the neck. and two more at the sides of the neck. and the suction cup below the chin; and the suction cup between the shoulders; and the suction cup on the kidneys; and the suction cups in the arms; and the suction cups on the legs; and the suction cups on the ankles;
and the suction cup does not treat blood from veins, but only small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and because of this, it does not weaken one at all, as is done for the treatment of veins. and it must not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any disease that comes from overfilling, until all the body is emptied.
And if for necessity of diseases to bleed, or for habits, we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between and in each time;
for there are those who, when they have need to bleed, do not eat meat;
and if such have overfilling and redness in their face, and in their cheeks, and darkness around the eyes;
and such as have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and are spitting blood; and if there are such who think, and see by signs blood, wounds, deaths, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially between the hours of the month, we command them to bloodlet after three hours of the day.
The treatment of the muscle and aids to fracture of the head ... that comes to them, and it is not fitting that this be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the treatment of the cephalic muscle, and it is not fitting that those of cold complexion use it, or those who have catarrh, for it does them much harm.
and for this reason, it is not fitting that those who have cold diseases in the head use ventilation.
And he who often heals with it becomes forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup a bit lower due to the forgetfulness.
Ventilation at the neck is in place of the treatment of the head and basilic muscles, and for this reason, it is effective for narrowing the vein, and cutting the channel of the pomum, and soon, and for replenishment.
and it must not remain too tightly, for if it holds too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
The wind passages at the second ribs of the neck are for headaches, eye pain, migraines, stranglement, and tooth root pain, and are situated in the healthy part of the basilica.
and it must be instructed to the patient that when they place their hand, they should not press the artery and avoid hemorrhage.
The wind passages beneath the chin are for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that affect the mouth. and they are situated in the healthy parts of the two lips.
The wind movements in the shoulders cause illness that comes from heat and congestion.
The ventosations of the kidneys are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the patient not to pierce too deeply, for the liver is naked beneath the flesh, and knows over nerves and arteries.
The cupping on the buttock is equivalent to hemorrhoids at the base, and for ailments beneath. It is necessary that the cupping be large, and made of iron, as it needs to fit well. and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break; and it causes large wounds.
The cups of the legs cure openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are effective for old pains of the reins, and of the marrow, and of the bladder, and diminish tumors;
and they are in the place of the two ankles, and the two feet, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many conditions.
The way to place the cup is to first empty it, then apply it steadily, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the part turn red and swollen, and appear with the redness of blood.
then remove the cup, and reset the cups, and take note of the condition of the body, for there are some with thick flesh and clear pores. if it is necessary to strike once only, and to make wide wounds, and somewhat deep; and suck lightly.
And if the swelling is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to dilate the way of the large blood.
And if the swelling is very swollen, it is necessary to strike a third time:
and when we wish to draw a little blood at a time, we only suck once. And if we wish to draw much blood, we begin often;
and if the skin is thick, they should be burned, and the punctures must be such that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, to anoint the eyes of the suction cups with a pungent and dissolving oil: if it is in esteem, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
and if it is in decay, with mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or some similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, take bitter aloes, or balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
And if the one who is to be healed has tight flesh and narrow pores, it is not necessary to put oil there, but it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or hawthorn water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
And those who have much moisture, let them rise from almond, or hawthorn water, or sumach water, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise with old wine, or vinegar water, or an infusion of hyssop or chamomile, or some similar.
and it is not fitting to apply a suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
and do not let them sleep after the suction treatment, and it is necessary that they be wrapped, when they are to be suctioned and when they have been suctioned.
And watch that the one who is healing is choleric, and if the wound is too active and inflamed. and it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuce cooked in vinegar, and similar things. and eat small portions, and hare meat, and moist meats.
and eat small portions, and hare meat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and moderate fragrant wine between old and new, and eats little, and eats small and few birds and pheasants;
And on the day he will cupping, he should drink more than eat;
And it is fitting to give some men either treacle or mace before or after cupping to strengthen the main limbs; And let it be fine powder, but it is not fitting that those who are hot should drink it.
The cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the kidney, and podagre, and on the abdomen and groin and thigh, for these members do not tolerate being pierced, and one does this only to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the nipples when the breast is wounded.
for to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to alleviate the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, as it may draw out the abscess by its attractive virtue, or expel the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when placed on the liver and on the stomach when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are applied empty to draw out only; and sometimes they are applied together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water or cold water, as in certain diseases of the pleura, and in such a manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water or water in which herbs suitable for this have been cooked.
The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have or place a small perforation in the middle, as if to put a needle, and made of lead, placed in front so that it does not burn the patient when applied to the limb.
And have in the middle a crosspiece of lead or iron to put a candle holder on, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them.
for the suckers of children are different from those of adults, and from thin ones from fat ones.
And one must place this sucker on the limb in such a way:
Take the wax flake or ointment, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is placed in the suction cup, so that the clarity remains at the bottom of the suction cup to avoid burning the patient.
and then place it on the body, and your thumbs should be at the puncture points as we have said, so that when one looks, the vapor goes away, and remove the suction cup.
and apply the ointment as before, and repeat frequently if you need to.
In the suction cup used for diseases of the pleura, no rod nor puncture points are needed, and it is applied only when it is filled with fluid, and placed on the body.
and this is the form:
Blistering herbs should be applied only to limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on the bare skin of chard, such as docks or nettles, and other similar plants;
and the quality of using them is that when you find blisters in clear fresh water without damage, use them;
and place them in clear fresh water until they soften and have nothing in their centers; and then apply leeches and suction cups, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place blisters on them;
and when they will be full and fall, if it is possible or one can put a suction cup, if he puts it, because it is worth little after.
and if not, lift the shoulder from the pillow, and then with water, very well, and then apply it;
and if the shoulder is too swollen after the body's fluids, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it there until the swelling subsides.
and if the swelling increases, put on broken glass or warts, and similar things, until it subsides.
or you put on the shoulder half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry out on the shoulder, this will stop the bleeding now.
and if you have more need of them, take others without.[/sansues]
And if the sutures do not wish to be taken, rub the wound with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the sutures come out, and then place them there. As soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere;
and when you see that they come out, powder a little aloes and ground salt or ash on them, and now they will adhere.
This begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know that fine thread, that the leaves of this chapter were not seen by any of the ancients, nor did anyone read a letter about them;
and for this reason the art has disappeared from our land, for I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have treated this art, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the summary of the word and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur to anyone, it is necessary to quickly heal the patient both on one side and the other, if nothing else prevents you, such as weakness of body, illness, or old age; or if the skin is too hot or too cold;
and use cold poultices, that is to say cold compresses, and meat of bird and chicory, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the blood vessels, until you have doubt of a hot abscess or spread of matter in the limb.
if the patient returns to the former regimen he was using.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that promote good healing or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, lentils, beef liver, oysters, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. And in good healing, the flesh regrows more quickly and the fractures heal faster.
And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot heal or mend well according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but without concern, reset over the broken bone and large tendons that fray and join the limb together until it is strong as before; and do not finish his work completely, and for this he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter. For there are fractures that go round, and others that are jagged, like the cuts of a writing pen.
For there are fractures that go round, and others that are jagged, like the cuts of a writing pen. And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with just a small crack.
And in every manner have his tool, and his instrument proper for the restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and the break of the bone is known by the limb being twisted, and is clearly perceived by probing with the hand;
and when there is no twisting and it does not react to touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have tortuosity, or fissure, or small break. If it does not suit you to move it by hand, but place medicines that follow here, and then hold it delicately now.
And know that the break that goes in length, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them in place equally, so that abscesses may come to life.
and if abscesses come to life, let him keep them for no more than a day until the abscesses are eased.
then place it equally on the skin that you can gently and carefully touch, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration where there are pieces.
then hold it steady as instructed later.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, support it in two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or by your hand if it is a small limb, or by two cords, or by one cord and by your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you must reset them as much as possible using all means at your disposal, and ensure that your treatment does not cause the patient injury or pain;
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not quite right:
If the shoulder is set beautifully, and not restrained too much nor pressed as those who cause hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have wished many times.
And when the limb is at the right point, well restrain the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and see to it that the limb is so secured that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at the right point, and it must be placed in proper disposition so that he feels no pain;
and see to it that the limb is so secured that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at the right point, and it must be placed in proper disposition so that he feels no pain; and see to it that it is set correctly, so that no twists remain when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
for there are small limbs, like those of the arm and thigh and similar: so it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, like the thigh and leg:
so it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and firm linen, for the wide linens embrace the entire large limb and constrain it evenly from all sides, so there is no shift.
then tie with light cloths, three or four turns according to the limb, and grip the linen tightly around your hand, then go above the break and constrain it less, so that the break can shift a bit away from the break.
and gradually soften the ligament, until you perceive a large part of the healthy tissue, then take the other ligament and turn around again over the broken area;
then return to the part opposite the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first article above;
then insert between the closed ligaments some linen or cloth, making sure they are all equal, then tie everything above the bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that alleviates the abscess and reduces swelling on top, and leave it there for several days.
then hold them with your fingers, and let them be of half the width of a thick rope, or of wood from which spindles are made, or of palm ribs, and let them be according to this shape:
but it must be that the splint which one places on the fracture is a bit wider and larger than the others;
and let it be as long as it must fit the size or length of the limb; then hold them with your fingers as you did at the first moment, then tie above a suitable thread as in the first instance at the fracture; tighter here, and less tight there;
and it must be that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax;
for if the thread is thick, as in works of foliage that make their loops in twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, for the loop cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it should not have less than two spaces between each eye.
And if the patient is injured by the shoulders of the stakes after the grip in their sound limbs, place over them linen stoppers or bandages of wool, so that it does not swell.
When the wound is with the cauterizer, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
And know that it is not fitting to grip all the broken limbs with stakes on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it must not be placed with too many eyes until after 5 days or 7, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring.
and here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take flour that stays on the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Another method of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take zinc oxide and lard and egg yolk and arsenic and arabic gum and myrrh, mix well; myrrh and aloes, mix well; alechil VIIII Ð—.; and make powder, and mix with honey from an egg; if the man's complexion is warm, use this poultice, for it is of good composition and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many.
Another manner of poultice that is good for sprains: take mugwort and vervain, take X Ð—.; myrrh and aloes, take IX Ð—.; ice, take 6 Ð—.; boil armenian bark for one hour, and grind well, and mix with water or abundant egg, and administer.
Another way to plaster joints and the dislocated bones, and alleviate the pain that occurs, and the damage from the bone, and the rupture: take new wool, and the marrow in oil that has been cooked, and put it on the wound.
This plaster does not cure, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removes pains.
Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and henbane leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for plastering to restore the break in the bone and to reduce the swelling of the abscess. Take root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches, of each a part;
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way of plastering stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of the member. Take roots of visvalve, and seeds of flax, centaury, melilot, and hyssop, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each a part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Iphyscras states in his book that one should not place anything on the broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between too soft nor too hard.
And Galen seems to say that one should place on the broken limb things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and male dog hair, or feathers of birds, and vitex, and equal-sized salt, and grind them, and make a poultice with them and apply it to the place.
Then remove the poultice after some time, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place; if you do not remove the poultice with clean hands. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no relief or swelling, then hasten, remove the poultice, and take out the plaster now.
and take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and dip it in water, and apply the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved. then let the limb rest for an hour, then place on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind with a wad, until you are sure of the warm abscess.
and let the inflammation in the limb rest, and let the pain be removed, then resume the fine binding, and a bit of plaster, and do not bind it so tightly as before. and continue finely until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is drained and redness and pain and swelling are gone from all of it, and you need to apply a plaster and a bandage, then renew them as you did first equally.
and if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, then it should not be unbound after three or four or five or seven days. and let it be twenty days at least, according to what we see, until the fracture heals and approaches setting of the bone.
then restrain more than first, and let it grow its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see the part dry more than necessary, know that growth cannot come. apply the warm cloth, every time you reset it, and let it be every third day, and slightly change its position.
by this method, cut the growth on the limb, and quickly stitch what the fool mends, that leave the limb deformed:
it is bad, and these are fearful acts, and I see nothing else but to leave it and treat it properly.
Many kinds of fractures exist, with various forms, and the causes are predetermined.
because there are fractures caused by sword blows, and the cuts sever the bone completely down to the marrow which is beneath the bone. and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute".
and these are the wounds from these two kinds of fractures, whether large or small.
And if there is a compression fracture, or a crack from stone, or falling on stone, or other similar cases.
And if there is a fracture close to the tissue beneath the bone, or on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is embedded in the bone as fine as a hair, and this fracture is small, and because of this, it is called "capillary" fracture.
and if the wound made by a stone strike, or a fall, or a similar thing, causes a piece of bone to break in and is lodged there as blacksmiths do when they work on cauldrons; if between the bones inside.
And this happens more to those who have or chief moist bones, such as children;
and happens in all these ways of breaking where small pieces come loose like splinters; and I will speak of it regarding its place.
And let us know all manners of breaks through their subtraction, and through the inquiry of tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is there.
The appearance of the hair is discerned by this: when the bone is uncovered and one rubs over it, black breaks appear.
In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient's symptoms. If you see any bad symptoms, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, paralysis, or fever, and if the eyes becomeçªå‡ºå’Œçº¢è‚¿, and other similar things due to various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any terrifying symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the fractures first come to you, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone rots, and the accidents as we have said come about.
And if the bone fracture comes to the cloth that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part in such a way:
and it is that you bind the patient's shoulder tightly, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and more over the figure of the wound as much as you can, and if the flow of blood comes with uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then use the aid that is necessary, and it is that you fill the space with wetted pieces of cloth soaked in rose oil. and let the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and be assured of the flow of blood. then begin beneath the bone to extract, and this is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
And then one cuts a larger incision than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of blades of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron;
and in the work apply lightly, so you do not burn the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it through and through, as when you administer blades with thorns; they must not be perfect but should pierce only to the testa (bone) and must have a margin or circle above the point that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone.
and you must have several, so that each comes to its place in the thickness of the bone, and you must have thorns for all bones.
and these are the forms of the three ways of cauterization:
The quality to pierce through the broken bone is that you place the cautery on the bone, and turn it until you know that the bone is pierced.
then remove the cautery to another part a little after, and thus do all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the teeth, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you move the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps.
and be careful that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the displacement which has remained of the bone to another instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be firmer and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if there is nothing of the small bones or any scales, gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with cloths and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galien said, which is simpler. and it is very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break is open and moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this incisor a lens-like object, of which its form is as follows:
And do not cut from one side, and let the cut be on two sides, so that the cutter is opposite the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and be well warned of the membrane that is beneath;
if it is close to the bone, gently remove it, for it can be removed very painfully and fearfully.
And if the bone break does not pierce to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must treat under that roughness, and remove scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, in order to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
If you use large razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
In each of the other incisions and subtle fractures, you must proceed according to its direction;
and this is a matter that is not included in the study of those who have devoted themselves to this art.
And if the scab is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and wool in rose oil, and apply it to the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and wool in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and apply it more lightly than you can, so as not to weigh down the scab. Then apply a lien over the other cloth, and do not press too hard that only the wound feels it.
and leave it so for one or two days, until the abscess is pacified. Then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, flour of vervain, powder of incense, and rue, and similar things.
and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer adhesively medicaments without causing irritation;
and ensure that the wound is thoroughly clean, neither leaving ointment behind nor allowing bowels to congeal, for when bowels congeal on the cloth of the brain, they will flow and cause great harm to the patient.
for when one applies something corrosive to the surface, one must not touch it from above. Therefore, take heed, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness comes only because of the medicine one has applied, and it has such virtue, then you should take a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and in gum one cloth, and apply it to the surface. then treat with the manner of treatments until he is healed.
Any two parts of the neck above are broken, whether one alone, because they are two bones;
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break easily, nor causes it to bow or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must place your little finger or joint from the neck, and set the break equal within your index finger, and to the pad to secure, so that the neck regains its natural figure. and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is above the thumb and your finger cannot reach the place, you must put it equally on the head of a needle about as large.
And if the fracture is of two parts, remake the other part, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have subsided, then apply to the head of the nose tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you apply the other to another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the nostril openings.
And any restorer said that we should moisten the tents with butter and change each day. It does not seem right to me, but they should be moistened with a preparation of egg yolk and powder of mill. then leave the tent, until the bones are hardened, and the cartilage toughened.
And at any time use goose quills instead of tents, and if for the sleeve curtain, keep the breaker, and blow on the patient from among. or make it as you see fit.
And if abscesses arise in the nose while you are working on it, you should apply a poultice or wet cloth in rose oil, or with a little dyakin.
And if no pus comes from the abscess, apply a plaster to the surface, made of silk flour and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk, then place light stoppers on it, and do not seal the nostril.
And if the break in the nostril is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with instruments suitable for this, then sew the wound, and treat the flesh with dressings and ointments suitable for this.
and if there is no wound within the nose, then perform a nasal cure with pledgets, and keep them in place until it heals.
When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound visible, and the fracture is open only, not broken into pieces but rather like hinges inside, one can recognize it lightly.
It must be, if the break is in the right part, that you place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, you place your index finger from the right hand into the break gently, and fix it with the other hand behind. Keep it steady.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, it is necessary to apply an extension to both parts equally.
And if movements of the teeth occur or a fracture happens, tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then apply a dressing over the broken jaw, and place a double layer of cloth on top. and place above the cloth a large shield well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed. and apply a plaster with powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour, after you have removed the crust.
and place above the plaster a light cloth. If the plaster dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it on until he is healed. many times it is cured in three weeks.
And if abscesses remain, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no fragment of the bone is missing; if it be so subtle that it came out with the instruments used for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, close the wound if it is large, and apply suitable poultices to promote healing until it is healed.
The shoulder breaks multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the fractures are according to three ways:
or it is broken and dislocated in two parts, with fragments, and is the least difficult to reset;
or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedures are such that when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken shoulder. and the other [shoulder] extend the neck towards the part;
then place the break equally on both sides, so that the form be as it should, and there be no appearance or movement.
And if you need to extend more, place a round pad of cloth or wool over the shoulder on the patient, and make it as large as your need requires. and extend and ease the forcele, and hold the pad firmly with your hand, so that you place the break equally, as it should.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder downward, because it comes from below, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his side, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and make the attendants support the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
and then adjust the break to both sides, and if you find it misaligned, you must realign it.
and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, shape it with one of the incisors that you have. but place it over the fracture, to prevent swelling:
and it seems like a spoon, and is not in place, and should also be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the wound is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its size.
And if blisters appear when it comes, soak them in rose oil and vinegar, and apply.
The compression of the bone, when it is sensed in wounds and surgical cuts, is that you apply a plaster of powder from the mill and egg white over the bone, and place light stoppers on top, and put a sphere beneath the patch if you need to. then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, and place the doubled cloth over the stoppers, and apply the plaster. then take a strip of cloth three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang free. and place the strip over the burner, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy side, and beneath the diseased side. and reset each part, and when you see that the ligaments hold the break properly, and you clearly see that the bone does not move over the broken part, then reward it daily, and when the ligaments are healed, so restrain;
and let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under his head to raise the shoulder. and realign the fracture of the humerus by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until no harmful accidents occur, for up to 20 days.
then renew the plaster if you see that he needs it, and hold it steady until it is restored.
and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less time for some individuals.
of the breaking of the shoulder
And it comes that the shoulder is broken or large bone not in the middle, and cannot be set by force.
if you set the joint according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
then put on the bone powder from the mill with abundant egg, and light bandages, and place over a double cloth. then place over a wide and thin strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are any gaps in the strip over the shoulder, fill those gaps with linen bandage strips so that the strip is evenly secured.
and then hold it with one large bandage tightly, so that the plaster does not move from its place, and check the ligature each day;
and every time he realigns it, hold it tightly, and adjust the plaster if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on his side.
and the shoulder heals in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when these numbers are completed, release it, and be sure, because it is not bone that can be put out lightly.
And if a piece of the bone tents out and is not over the heart, incise it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the strong ligament to cool the abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The bone is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely. but it often breaks at the seam.
And when it is broken in the middle, it declines outward, and the patient feels great pain, along with swelling. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movements in the broken bones become apparent, and everyone can see this well.
And the restoration is such that if the patient lies often on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly and evenly adjust in all ways as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then apply plasters and ointments over the fine salt layer or other light substance, wrap it in a cloth, and secure it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage round the back, and hold it in place properly, and rewound the strip every hour, and if it loosens, you hold it tight;
and if it is necessary to dislocate it, for corruption or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and you dislocate it, and scrape the plaster, and treat what has come of kinds of treatments;
then reset the plaster, and hold it steady until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only in their broad parts behind the back, and at the head within, and they do not break due to being too flexible. and it is felt well in the inquiry of the wound.
And the restoration is that you align the break as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
And if the break in the ribs is leaning inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, similar to that of a pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue. and the patient feels pain, and immediately vomits much blood, and this is a serious health issue, and the ancients have used great skill in treating it.
And if some say it is necessary to give foods that swell the belly to counteract the heat.
We do not make such incisions into abscesses that there should not be pus if it has not come. And if pus has come, then drain it.
And they say that we put suction cups on the shoulder to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; in any case, there is doubt that the suction cup will draw the superfluities to the shoulder due to the weak disposition.
And some say that we should cover the shoulder with wetted wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the treatment inside, then it should be treated with a pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone piercing the ligament, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to incise above the shoulder blade of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place something underneath the instrument to protect the lung.
and then one must cut the bone, and gently draw it, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals.
And if abscesses remain, place moist cloths in rose oil, and apply over the area.
and treat the area as appropriate for the abscess, and let it rest well over the correct side until it heals.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, observe whether their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when pricked with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is fatal in many respects, and if they can move and feel well when pricked with a needle, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and the patient will recover if proper treatment is applied.
And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, take note if the flesh is softened, and if the accidents are in the hands, and on the back showing windosity and emission without desire.
And when one has examined it on its belly, there shows emission without desire. And when it has been soothed on their back and they wish to sit up, they cannot. It is mortal: if it does not labor much in its treatment.
And if such an accident does not come to them, it is the matter less severe.
And the treatment is that you apply heat if there is a hot abscess, and place on the spine an oil rose or oil of egg yolk until it subsides.
then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
And if any bone separates, it must be coped over the vein; and remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with ointment promoting healing until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the kneecap," then you should hold your left hand pouch tight and keep it level with your right hand as much as possible, then apply the plaster and bandage over it, if needed.
then he holds it, and if there is a broken bone, he cuts it open, removes the bone, and treats the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Then it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there will be some relief in the head; and he makes a long incision, and declines to the back teeth, and brings pain to the affected area, swelling, and marks that are broken.
And the treatment is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the broken area. and know which is the break and its shape.
and if the fracture is only at the head, set that break evenly, so that it remains in natural alignment.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, you make the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of that break may be aligned. And when you have set it evenly, apply a plaster, then place a stick or a splint on top, and bind the fracture so that it does not move.
and apply the splint over the ribs, so that it remains even. And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
And if abscesses form on it, do not touch them, until the abscesses are eased, and place on them what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, bind it as is fitting, if there is no further bad accident.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder assistant is that which is between the cut and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two manners.
of which one is that you take a rod of medium size, according to this form:
And tie the two heads with threads, and pull them up, seating the patient on the chair;
then he places the broken arm on the rod, until it comes to the armpit, and has placed a cradle of wood in the middle, then pulls up with any weight or the attendants extend downward;
then place the splinter burner equally in their hands until the splinter returns as it should.
And the other method is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two attendants that one hold what is on the reaper's blade at his hands, and the other hold below the ligature, extending each to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligature both below and above the reaper's blade, and extend each attendant to their part.
And if the splinter is near the head of the shoulder, you must place one end of the splint over the spine, and the other towards the knife, under the splinter;
and if the splinter is towards the knife, you must place the splint lightly, without effort, so that the splinter is even over the bone and the knife.
then place the splinter equally as it should be, and hold it steady, if no abscesses are present.
And if abscesses are present, you must not hold it steady for more than seven days, and place on it moistened wool in oil of rose until the abscesses are pacified.
then he holds it, and the way to hold it is that you place the plaster on the blister, then position the arm on the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the side.
and place the cloth, and hold it on the shoulder support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless something prevents it or the bone is displaced.
And if you doubt that the bone is displaced, use strapping. Place a wider and stronger strap over the fracture, with two fingers' width between each strap. Ensure each strap is large enough to cover the fracture on both sides.
then hold on the straws, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fire cautery, stronger and less by pulling away.
And if you see the base of the straws and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the heat abscess, let it remain tied just seven days, as we have said;
then examine the bandage each three days, that itching or swelling does not arise at the site, or that the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow. If the treatment, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, and place his hands on his stomach.
and place over the shoulder a cushion full of evenly placed wool, and observe each hour of the day or night whether the figure of the broken limb moves or whether the tendons become softened.
if the treatment through the virtue of medicine, and he gives the flesh that we have placed before, in such a manner that the flesh be at the first layer of tendons; and when it begins to regenerate, let it be firm.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be replaced after 40 days from then. and then one must release it and administer baths and ointment medicines to heal it.
And if the stricture is ugly and contracted, it must remain to be unbound for one or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "foscile," of which one is small, and it is that which follows the pocket;
and the other is large, and it is that which is underneath, opposite the small one;
by chance, it may be broken only the large foscile, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and more severe than when they are broken together.
If it is the small fragile bone that is broken merely, then it should be extended slightly and kept in place.
And if it is a large dislocation, it must be held tighter;
and extend it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller ones lower than the others, and let the patient cross his hands over himself, and the cushion in front higher, so that the patient does not suffer any discomfort;
then extend the minister's hand to the part below his hand, or at the elbow, and another minister above.
And then set the bones in place, according to their best form.
And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its place, and if there is any detached piece that cannot be gripped to restore it to its place, then cut it out, as we have said before.
And if with the wound burner, I spoke of it in the singular chapter; if take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses occur, apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft. and bind the dressing gently, until the abscesses are soothed.
And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of the powder from the mill with abundant egg, then place the bandages, and let the bandage for the fracture be stronger, and a little wider than the others.
and know that it should have six bandages or braces in various positions: or the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more closely at the damaged area than elsewhere, and less throughout the day when moving about, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the dressings that are on the damaged area be soft and moist, and not hard or harsh;
and let the dressings that are on the damaged area be soft and moist, and not hard or harsh; and let the threads, from which it is drawn, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after a few days. And if anyä¸è‰¯çŠ¶å†µå‘ç”Ÿåœ¨è‚¢ä½“ä¸Šï¼Œä¾‹å¦‚ç˜™ç—’å½±å“åˆ°è‚¢ä½“ï¼Œé‚£ä¹ˆä½ åº”è¯¥ç”¨çƒ­æ°´å†²æ´—è¯¥è‚¢ä½“ï¼Œç›´åˆ°ç˜™ç—’å¾—åˆ°ç¼“è§£ã€‚
and let the limb rest not too much.
And then reapply the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, treat accordingly.
And if you take care that the bandages do not come to the member, because it is too tight, it must be that you soften them a little and leave them for a few days, until the bandages fit properly, and then tighten them.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not allow him to dislocate untiläºŒåå­—ï¼ˆæ³¨ï¼šåŽŸæ–‡ä¸ºæ³•è¯­ï¼Œæ­¤å¤„ç¿»è¯‘æ—¶è°ƒæ•´ä¸ºç¬¦åˆä¸­æ–‡è¡¨è¾¾ä¹ æƒ¯ï¼‰äºŒåå››å¤©ã€‚
or within, then he puts his hands on his neck, and let his neck be level, and takes care of movement and displacement, and sleeps on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV days, and by chance in XX days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
Of the fracture of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, fractures occur rarely, and there often come many sprains.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, the patient should sit cross-legged and straighten it in front of him equally;
then place his hand on the extended cloth, and have the attendant extend the broken bones, and set the ends equal until they are well aligned;
and apply the plaster and stoppers; if no abscesses come, then place a bandage according to the size of the joint. and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the blister is on the outer side of the sole of the foot, make a pad of linens, and instruct the patient to bind it to their injured sole. and then wrap it with a long linen bandage, and make the pad of cloth as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it properly.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, it must be that you place one splint above and another beneath on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind completely around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
And if the blister comes to any of our fingers, if it is swollen, place it evenly, as is appropriate. and hold it with the sole, and if you see fit place a small straight stick to lift the blister, and do not move it.
and if the blister is on another toe, such as the index or one of the others, place it evenly, and support it with the healthy toe that follows; or you tie them all together while holding, as much as they need, or you place a stick on top, like a poultice.
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of warm abscesses, and assist those who come, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it when it turns front and back.
and the restoration is thus by tying above the break, and the other below. And the patient lies on their back, then each minister extends their ligature to their equal share;
and this is when the break penetrates the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one ligature on the side of the knife, and the other ligatures below the break.
And likewise if it is near the shoulder, then the ligatures should be below the shoulder, and the extension downward.
then place the bone in its natural position with both hands, so that it is according to its natural form, and then apply the plaster and the ligature, if there is no abscess.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first then return to your work and treatment; the treatment is done in such a manner.
It is necessary that you wrap the blister with one or more layers of thick cloth, and let the excess hang, then straighten the leg until the heels reach the root of the toes, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee outward, and keep the end of the thread above.
then wrap the leg and thigh with cloth, then place a pad over the blister, and put a pad on the bone of the leg.
then place the cloth soaked in wine between the leg and the thigh with soft wool to keep the compression even, then begin to wrap it in the form of three or four turns around the wound; and as you go further from the wound, apply less compression;
then take the two ends of the thread you have placed between the leg and the thigh, and secure three loops that are above, then return to the top of the thread, until you see through the cloth.
and keep the compression so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there is no abscess, swelling, or any other similar condition. And if it occurs, release it, and place it as it comes, as we have said many times.
and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, you must wash them, if possible; and if you cannot do so, you must cut the area and extract the force. and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh breaks when we put splints on it, as with the shoulder and arm.
in any case, in the restoration done, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in three days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversities of constitutions.
Know that in the groove of the knee a fracture occurs rarely, but it bends many times.
And if it fractures, it is not just a crack or hole, but occurs in any wound, and feels like a deep injury.
And the restoration is such that one equalizes what is sound to its two sides, until it is assembled and moves as one can.
then apply the plaster, and put a round strip if you need it, and hold it in place as is fitting, then renew all the preparations that we have said for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar. and apply to each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" straightwise, and the other is called "foscile".
and every fracture in the leg occurs as it does in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is equally as that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
And if the fine bone is broken, then turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and turn over.
Then extend it, and set it equal, and tie the straps equally;
but in any case, if the break is uneven, and there are multiple pieces, then the extension should be less and more gentle; and adjust it according to its nature.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of bent willow wood that fit the leg on both sides, and let them be long from the middle of the leg down to just below the knee;
then wrap in two layers of linen, one over and one under, and tie in the middle thus, and at this tying it will not allow the leg to bend to the right nor to the left, and so it is well.
and no one administer the wine of the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and place the leg to guard against movement, and properly done thus in the fracture where there is a wound.
and move the leg each day, to see if there is an abscess forming or any other accident. if the wound be healed.
of the fracture of the bones at the foot
At the ankle no fracture comes about, but in the bones of the foot fractures come sometimes and in the toes often, and there is force only with multiple conditions.
And if a bone in the foot is fractured, and you see these bones protrude one over the other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if it were walking, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, and press so that they return to their proper places.
then apply the plaster and ointments over it, and place under the foot two small boards for the head of the shoulder, then secure to the foot appropriately, then that you have wrapped with cloths around, and other things of which you have need.
And when three days or four have passed, release the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two are broken, restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone an splint according to the length of the bone, and make it a little wider. Then place under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and secure it appropriately;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot; and let it be placed above the head of the table downward the abdomen of the foot, so that it touches well.
and you must not forget the other things that I have said to other breakers, as we have said; and assist each accident as it must.
of the breaking of the bone at the knife wielder
and when the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit stretched out, then incline her towards the part of the back, and she should be held from behind.
and fill the cavity of the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as it can hold.
and then release the woman, and slowly raise her back, and thus the cotton will come out as it reaches the entrance of the woman's nature, and the bone will return with the flesh.
and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or so. the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a bladder of berberis, tie it to the wound with a string, and fill the entire bladder into the body. then blow into the string, until the bladder is swollen inside. the body will restore the fracture.
then fill it with cloth, and leave it in place for several days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm is broken in a man or a woman, reset it as we have said for the hip bone.
and these fractures nearby are not hidden from him who puts his study and use to it, and understands my book.
For the fractures indicate several ways the right path of restoration: understand it therefore.
In the thigh, when it is broken, take an owl's wing and insert the thigh; then wrap it in cloth on the outside, and let it lie for three days or so, and it will be quickly healed.
of fracture with wound
He who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, must be treated for the wound now, as our treatments indicate.
And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart the healing in that same hour or on that day, unless an abscess arises.
And if an abscess arises, let the healing continue until a new day, as long as the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause it to bring about a harmful accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, you must set it gently with your hands, extending it slightly.
And if you do not have the extension, prepare one with iron, which has seven or eight long prongs, and the size is according to the size of the wound. and because of this, it is necessary for the user to soak three or four in accordance with what he may need for each treatment of a fracture.
and let it be round and somewhat large, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be hard in front, and thick in the middle forward.
And it is called "palainche," so it is necessary that curved heads be placed on the head of the apparent bone. and apply it once, so that it returns, and let them be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot grasp the bone well, then you must correct the head of the bone, so that the instruments can hold it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, use a suitable instrument such as a lancet or probe, to your ability.
then reset what is detained in the bone due to hardness and small fragments.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
If you do so until it is in its place, then moisten the dressing with vinegar or wine, and properly if it is so. and do not place any dressing or other thing on the wound that might cause putrefaction and corruption.
then administer herbs when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, covering only around it according to its size, and take great care that the wound is not restrained with the dressing.
and many times the foolish have done this, and caused the patient to die orè…çƒ‚ä¸€æ¬¡ã€‚è¯·æ³¨æ„ï¼Œè¿™é‡Œçš„â€œcorrodentâ€åœ¨æ³•è¯­ä¸­æŒ‡çš„æ˜¯ä¼¤å£çš„è…çƒ‚æˆ–æ¶åŒ–ï¼Œè€Œä¸æ˜¯å­—é¢æ„ä¹‰çš„â€œè…èš€â€ã€‚æ­£ç¡®çš„ç¿»è¯‘åº”è¯¥æ˜¯ï¼šâ€œand many times the foolish have done this, and caused the patient to die or become corrupt onceã€‚â€ and let the compresses be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you suspect that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not fitting to place on it. but wrap around, instead of on it, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days swelling in the wound, remove what you have placed on top of it for wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
And you should dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the swelling drains gently downward.
And if many days pass and the swelling does not subside, know that there are small bone fragments, for which you should treat the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces to relieve the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the vein, or some other form of corruption, it must be treated, according to what is said in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or other similar large bones, do not manipulate it, for often death results, but leave it until it rots.
by chance it will fall off after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, then let it be.
Many times after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and a sad sight to see the shape of the limb; and sometimes it cannot make the limb perform its natural actions.
Therefore, take care if the bone is fresh: if you administer styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and shark liver oil, and acacia, and similar other substances, so that you use any of these things, or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine, or with abundant egg or with ointment; and place them on the nose in stoppers, and hold them tightly, and do not release them with your hands for days.
and place them on the nose in stoppers, and hold them tightly, and do not release them with your hands for days. and then dislocate it again, and repeat with another, until the nodes are removed.
or hold it on a well-made piece of flax; for the property of flax is that it removes all swellings on the limbs.
and if the node has already turned to hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cut the skin above and expose the excess. or have it removed by any razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
a limb that is weak after the siege
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and after the limb remains weak and delicate, of which one is because it was tied too tight, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of too great movements, not at their proper time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and strengthen his body, until the blood is multiplied within him. and give him baths, and grant him joy and pleasure.
then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice draws to the great abscess, and frequently wash it with warm decoction, until the abscess comes to the surface of the limb; and returns to its natural form.
of the limb twisted after recovery When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
for do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all over again. Many fools have done this in our land;
and these operations are blamed, and great harms arise, and by chance death occurs;
If the nodations and tortures are fresh, they should be washed with hot water, or herbs softening should be cooked, such as leaves of vismarvel, roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and you apply a softening poultice, as well made, and you take the vismarvel root, and cook it with gelatine grease or silk-cotton oil, and apply it on;
or you take fat figs, and grind them with colophony, and similar medicines that alleviate quickly.
And sometimes the nodes are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And move the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with forceps, then it should be cut just to the bone with a fine incisor lightly. and apply caution and study to the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, it must now be brought back without rubbing.
and if one delays, the eyes will swell, and by chance, if they are reset with pins in the eye;
for it is not appropriate to move it when the eye is swollen: many times it brings about spam and other pains;
in any case, when this happens, make the patient well, then let them rest until all the abscesses are pacified;
then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it comes back to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the shoulder to the foot.
Often it happens that the jaws are dislocated sideways, and the dislocations of both sides occur according to two methods: or they are slightly displaced from their sockets, and made somewhat lax; or they are completely dislocated and hang toward the ear, and saliva from the mouth is lost so he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, wrapping his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is minor, it often returns to place through natural means.
And if it is complete and thorough, you must reduce it quickly, without delay;
and in such a manner that the assistant grasps the patient's head, and places his fingers or a poultice from one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation in the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be held back, to keep steady;
and instruct the patient to soften, his jawbones, and move them in all directions. And place the joint evenly, until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reset is firm, especially if these are the two jawbones together, then soak them in hot water and oil, gently resetting them.
nor should you forcefully reset them, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well, then apply moistened cloths in a paste made of rose oil and wax, then tie them lightly with soft threads.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his shoulders between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor attempt to turn their heads, but give light food until the pains are gone, and set the jaw bones.
and then let him eat light food, and do not force his mouth open for eating and drinking until the jaw bones are well set and healthy.
And if the two mandible bones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not fully returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffness become habitual, and sometimes there is intestinal distension by accident, and by accident there is vomiting of black bile.
And when you see this, know that it is dangerous; and often the person who experiences it dies within nine days.
The shoulder cannot be dislocated along the side within its socket and further down, and is only dislocated once at the joint, and one can feel this clearly.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and stretches his arms; and then press the head firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and the bandage, and hold it steady;
and the shoulder that is near the cut cannot be reset; if it can, and if it is reset even once, then you must reset it to its place as we have said;
then apply the plaster and the bandage, hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
and in the same manner, the shoulder of the scapula is brought back when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated for three reasons:
it is due to one reason that it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade out of place; and the second is at the part of the hip; and by chance dislocates above, and that happens seldom;
and does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder, and does not dislocate within because of the nerves;
and often dislocates out towards the shoulder blade, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it springs suddenly;
for those who have enough flesh, cut it out, and suture it back in.
And by chance it happens to some men through a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it moves towards the armpit, and place a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. and you will find a depression in the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit at the axilla, on the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye. and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move at all.
and also, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, for you can find it clearly by touch;
and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or when the patient is sick.
And the method is that the attendant lifts the patient's limb upwards, then places their palms under the armpit, and resets the joint by force upwards to its place. and the attendant lifts the hand, extends it upwards, and places it there. it will come quickly.
and if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. and he administers relief and soothing, as with a decoction of thyme and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be administered;
then oil the patient's back, and place a thickness of woolen cloth evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the limb's heel on the cloth, and suspend the shoulder blade properly, and draw the hand of the patient.
and suspend the shoulder blade of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns now, and if you see that it has dislocated, reset it according to this method:
and ensure that someone who is larger than the patient is present; and let it be straight towards the side, and place the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs from it; and others pull the hand of the patient down towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, he can carry something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
And it must be reset in another manner as well:
and it is that you insert a long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be centered like a stake, and neither too large nor too thin; then place it under the patient, but let it have a cloth cover on top, and the patient be hanging from the length of the stick.
then extend his hand downward from the other side, and the joints will return to their place quickly.
and if it does not wish to return through all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: take one ember from two large arms and four thick twigs, which have the head rounded to easily enter perfectly beneath the socket, according to this form:
then tie the ends of the stick with a cloth so that the stick does not burn the patient, then place it beneath the socket of the patient.
and extend your arm over the long stick, and tie the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand. Then place your arm on a rung of a ladder that is wide, and extend the hand downward, and leave the body hanging from the other side. the jointure returns now.
And when it is done, in whatever manner it may be, you must put under the armpit a pad of even wool, then apply the plaster prepared with flour of mill, incense, and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the pad from under the armpit appropriately, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
and it must be eaten little, as the limb becomes strengthened, for it will heal faster;
and then eat more after 7 days or 10, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, you must apply three cauteries at intervals, as is stated in the chapter on cauteries.
and if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm above your head, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. and know that the joint will never return to its place.
The dislocation that is near the buttocks, and the nipples, or behind, is caused by impulse and extension of hands, and is administered elsewhere;
and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes cracks in the limb, and delays due to movement, the patient uses baths many times until that crack heals and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points, and returns to points;
and is dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind; the dislocation is not hidden, for it can be seen and felt clearly. and is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the sick side with the healthy side, you must clearly see it. And the joint is frozen, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it in the same way that abscesses come to head and heal, for if abscesses came to head and healed, it would be grievous to bring them back.
and by chance cannot be restored to its entirety, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than others, and causes greater pain, and by chance death may occur.
And the restoration is such, when it can be restored in that manner, that you extend its limb with both your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands are placed along the edge of the wound, inside and outside, and hold the joint together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his face, and presses with the root of his palm where it is dislocated.
And if it will not return to its place, administer strong extension;
and it is when two ministers stretch out their arms, and hold them by the wrists, so that they do not move with the stretching;
then turn the arm in both directions, since you have wrapped it in a long and wide double cloth;
and when the minister joins the joint at the hand, apply heat to any eye to soften the joint, then form the joint firmly, until it returns.
and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg yolk, and form the joint firmly. Then hang the arm by the neck of the patient, and let it be for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly set in its place, loosen the bond, and leave it;
And if you see that the joint is not set well, reapply the plaster and the bond, and leave it for some days until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
And if it feels sore after resetting the joint, and it moves, bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved. Or you place a fatty lamb tallow on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and apply or bathe it. and when it sweats, he rubs the joint vigorously, then puts on a linen cloth, and then into a bath; and so do this two or three times, until he is healed;
and if you see, put on sheep's lung moistened with heated butter, and hold it there;
it will return to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand
The shoulder of the hand is dislocated, and its reduction is light, more than other joints. In any case, it must be reset quickly to its place as soon as it is dislocated, just as the joint becomes swollen or an abscess appears hot.
And the procedure is that you place the affected hand on a table, extend the minister's hand, and place the patient's palm over the appearance of the joint, and keep it there until it returns.
It is necessary to check whether it is properly aligned; then place the back of the affected hand on a table in extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the examiner place their hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, wrap it in soothing plasters and leave it to begin again.
And if it cannot endure this, and you cannot place it in its proper position after a few days, the joint will remain misaligned.
and it does not harm anything for the patient while the hand is softened, and cannot strain any object at all: then you will know that the nerve is cut, or the artery;
if there is no other way than to strain with the fire cautery for the case, and by chance it does not help with anything.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, apply warm watery grease and rub until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist;
then set the thumb, and hold the dislocation with your fingers until it returns to place, then support the head of the thumb and pull it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it remain two days, and then make it even on that day;
and do not bind it, as we have said, and let the joint rest on that day, and move it, and bind it again later.
and do this often, until it is tight, and always do so, if it has dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it as you did before until it is healed;
and do so likewise, when it has dislocated in another place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no point in treating it, as death comes quickly to the patient.
And the signs are that the vomit suddenly occurs without volontÃ©, and cannot be held back, and often a limb is softened, or both knees, or both arms, or I.
And often the shoulder moves to four parts;
that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
the treatment is to reward it if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there be no cure or healing of the whole.
And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say that it has no great benefit for all.
but I have summarized it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the anus, there is no health;
and likewise that which comes directly to the two sides, and one can cure only that which comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient's pain be extended to one side equally, and have no swelling beneath him, so he does not swell.
then stick one hot coal on the head in a hole of earth, and another on the foot, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another on the hips, and on the knees, and on the ankles;
and two ministers know the strings, one on the head and the other on the foot, among the two coals;
and they be well closed, the cinders as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine forthright until it recovers.
And if it does not recover through this treatment, take a board of three fingers' breadth, and wedge it under the wall, and if the patient is on their side, place the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle part of the board on the spine; and place the mirrors' feet on the other head of the board, and press well until it returns to its place;
and if you see, do it at the hinge that turns by hand. And you insert two pincers into the head of the patient's shoulder from one side, and two others on the other side, placing one pincer above and below each hot iron.
and in each iron, place one firework, or the torch be straight, and let the irons be firmly planted in the ground so they do not move.
and between each pair of irons, place one turning iron, on which the wire turns, and place two small irons of a palm's length in the turning iron to rotate the torch.
and then attach the wire that is among the irons to the turning iron on the head side, and the other wire to the other turning iron on the side. Each minister turns their turning iron following the wire, and the master places the straightened wire as we have said.
And when they are even, place a desiccative plaster with much egg on them, and then the stoppers, and then the paste of a tablet of three doses of long, purplish wood that dries the fleshiness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient to subtilize recovery until he is healed;
And if anything comes at the end of recovery, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the paste that we have mentioned above. And once it is administered with a piece of flax, and if the appearance in the lower spine of the back comes, take care that this is a dislocation. and it is the bone that displaces, for which one must not have any presumption: by chance it would bring about death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder joints come out only due to dislocations, not in the same way as other joints.
and the hip joint is dislocated into four parts: inside and behind, in front, and at the back;
and more inside they turn, and only slightly dislocated in front and at the back.
And the knowledge of a dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend as far as the healthy one. and it is the joint that is elongated and swollen from a hot abscess, because the heads of the thigh bones come there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
And the signs for those who have it before them, are that their leg is well positioned according to the completion; wholly, do not double the knee in pain, and if one tries to make it go, it cannot, and retains its urine, and swells the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that this leg is more twisted than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the shoulder is at the side of the ribs.
The treatment for this case of dislocation is that you reduce it if the dislocation is old, and it remains in its position, then there is no need for further treatment. and there must needs be no presumption.
And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must hasten to return the joint and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance it may return on its own, and has no need of further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or at the place where it is tied above the knee; and have another assistant stretch his hand over in such a manner that he places his hands under the armpits, then tie him firmly with a cord above the thigh; and others hold the head of the limb;
and extend up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common for the four similitudes, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it must be treated for its similarity.
When the dislocation is in front of the hip, you must support the patient on their healthy side, then place the limb over the root of the thigh, and the bone below the groin. Then tie the ligature above the groin and around the femur.
then have another minister support the patient's arms, and grasp the large bone of the injured thigh, and extend it downward firmly. if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is milder than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong cord above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be stretched about two lengths more than the other.
then let it hang from the top of a pole, and let two long beams be placed on the ground.
then command the minister to embrace the thigh from above, and have other ministers hang with the injured person, who embrace firmly around the thigh, because the joint is returning quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, the patient lies down, as we have said in that which has stiffness, and draw out the ligament above the sick leg properly, and above the tendon also;
then place two sticks, one at the head and the other on the foot, then insert the stick between the legs of the sick person in the proper position; and plant moist cloths between them, so that they do not cool the sick person. Then extend each minister towards him, and place the mirrors equally at his side where the dislocation is.
And if it returns, that is good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in gilbosexterity, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said. and place the thumb's pain to be on the angry patient, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is downward, it is not appropriate to stretch the patient downward or lift them up from the ground; instead, the patient should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated downward, as we have said in regard to lying on two hips. and let it be on its face, and stretch the ligament as we have said before, and must one press on the joint on the board. and it will be correct when the patient stretches its legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and secure with a bandage, so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then remove the bandage and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are equal, secure them as before, and let them rest for 3 days;
then remove the bandage, and let it go easily, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind.
and do not lose moisture.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not lock at the knee, know that it is dislocated;
And the restoration of all is that you instruct the patient to sit straight, and extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their foot, and put their foot on your feet;
then take their knee with your palms, and pull between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and have another person extend their foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it locks lightly at the knee.
and apply the plaster, and air the leg at the thigh, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then release it.
and do not allow the patients to walk until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is dislocated once, and thoroughly reduced both inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and feels hard in the part where it dislocated:
the reduction is light, and one should gently extend it with their hands when the patient is only fainted.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must seat the patient upright, and hold them with one minister above the leg, below the ankle;
then draw the foot to yourself with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and lift the foot beautifully upwards;
and do this twice as we have said, lifting and drawing the foot;
if it returns, that is well;
if not, repeat the operation, for it will return;
and if it cannot return in this way, let the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and bind cloths around him to prevent him from moving;
then have the ministers seize the calf, and others stretch the foot to their hands or to the place, and bind it at the heel; then stretch each minister equally, and the patient's calves be placed between the ministers' calves to hold the patient when they are stretched;
then place the shoulder dislocated in their hands, and others stretch the healthy leg from above, and the dislocation will quickly return to its place.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and plugs on, and strengthen the bandage, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch over the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight;
then let it rest for two or three days, and when the swelling subsides, remove it.
then release it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to go out for four days; and if he goes out before the end of this period, it is not certainty that he will not swell again.
And if an abscess comes up, it must be relieved as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
of the two When both are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended with effort, and this is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or foot, it is necessary to place the patient's shoulder on a flat surface or on a board completely straight, and put his foot over what appears from these joints, then press firmly on his foot until it returns.
and when it is set and there appears nothing, place a shoulder board under the sole of the foot, then press firmly, and let it rest for three days, then release it. and let it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one sees it healing, many times the patient dies:
if you are not overly presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not thoroughly patient and merciful and not too bold;
and begin with things that calm the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery. and when you see hope, now reset the limb in place, as the abscesses cool and begin to heal.
and when the limb is set, administer things to soothe the abscess hotly, and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones displaced, set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
and guard against entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for this is according to thy Creator, and for the knowledge of thy arm and thy body.
