O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine by assembling its filling, and have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations. And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is strongly rooted in our region and has been entirely excluded from everything, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients that their hands have moved. And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been neglected.
It seems to me that I should vitalize the entire arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will assemble the forms of the cautery irons, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it is fitting that he who undertakes this master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of them, and their movements and veins moving and resting, and from where they issue.
And because Hippocrates said that without understanding is much, and without practice is little; and especially in the art of manual skills.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he act improperly and harm people.
So many times I have wished more of those who undertake this science and abandon themselves to it without experience.
For I have seen a fool who incised an abscess of scrophules or throat of a woman, and incised the arteries of her neck; for so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I have seen another fool who incised a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; and he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
And I have seen another fool who took care of the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the burner made a wound;
and the surgeons full of ignorance restrain the breakage on the wound with strong ligatures, and do not leave any part of the flesh untied, and leave it thus completed.
and he commands that he does not release it at all;
and he delays until the leg becomes entirely swollen and the foot rots away.
I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to release the leg; and when I heard him dislocate it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
But the corruption of the bone was already confirmed or in the member, and could not be cured.
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the member was entirely lost.
And take another blade which collapses the embedded abscess, and then inflame through the wickedness of its authority.
For an abscess, when it is pure of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron if it is not in such a place where all the corrupted parts can be completely removed.
And for this, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, work where there is danger in many positions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For this, it is necessary that you take care of it, so that the foolish ones cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your instruments in hand and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way, so that by the grace of God you come to their salvation and be praised;
and leave the terrible diseases threatening health;
and remove your arms from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: Do not take ill diseases into your care if you are to be called mad.
I have dealt with this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and water medicament cauteries, and are ordered from the head down to the feet;
and the forms of the instruments, and the implements for the cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and it is about the chapters ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and it is ordered from the shoulder to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus, since we remember the work, it must be that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and of harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and the secrets replied to.
and on this many wise men spoke, and agreed with it.
and let them speak but little, for I fear the lengthiness.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether of two complexions: that is to say complexion warm with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In a warm and dry complexion with matter, they debated and said that the fire cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not useful for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be applied to a warm disease by heat, nor by dryness.
and he says who says the opposite that the fire cautery does great help for sickness hot and dry that comes in men's bodies. For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it so through experience.
And in all cases, do not intervene unless it is someone who has proven its effectiveness and knows through long practice the art of cauteries, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and duration of the time.
of other constitutions we have no fear, especially for cold and moist diseases. And all the more they came together and agreed on the fire cautery.
And know, son, that fire cautery together with heat is of the secrets of wound treatment, and has greater goodness than a burning medicinal cautery.
For the fire is simple, and affects only the part that is burned, and does not harm other parts to a great extent.
Hot medicines spread from one part to another and cause diseases in the affected parts due to their heat. and sometimes they cure the patient.
The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study I have devoted to the art, and it is concerning the truth of things;
and for this I excuse the length of the words, for it pleases me not to deprive you of the secret, which is about the fire and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher states in demonstrating; receive it in your thoughts.
And know, boy, when the cauteries ought to be made, and they have chosen times.
And I say that the fire cautery is suitable at all times, for the evils coming about are removed by the aid of the cautery. and especially if the cautery is for pains urgent and necessary that cannot wait for the time when greater mischief does not arise in the limb.
And never think of it, dear boy, as those foolish men do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus;
and they say thus; but it is not as they think, for cautery is not medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that cause pain, and it works like medicine for the speed of its virtue and the power and authority of its action.
And it is possible that the disease comes once according to the patient's constitution and the location of the disease and its virtue;
and they are gathered in him due to the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not, apply cauteries to him where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauteries for pain, and similar things, and the same pain will not return. but this happens rarely.
And few people understand for what reason cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is true.
but they do not believe that cauteries work after medicine, and their belief is false. For when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
The ancients said that cautery instruments made of gold are hotter than those made of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold or its high density;
and they said that the coals of the cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have proven it and found that it is indeed true in some people;
and gold cautery instruments are hotter than those made of iron, as they said. And whenever you heat an instrument made of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it will cool quickly.
and if you heat it too much; if they do it with fire; and then there is sufficient obstruction.
Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins should be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold in the head, and there are two of them, which we make because of a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicinal means changing the humor three or four times, according to what the virtues and strength of the liquid and the custom of the patient allow. and then reapply the cautery to the patient.
And then place it crosswise in your hands, and put his hands on the palms;
after place the base of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and when these two means come, bleed from the armpit then heat the cautery called "olive", of which here is its form: And place it on the armpit mark with ink, and do so by lowering and withdrawing your hand little by little, turning it. then withdraw your hand alone, and raise the armpit if you see bone slightly. and if you do not see it, reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
after take some thread, and put in soft cotton inside, and place it on the armpit, and let it for three days.
after apply a moistened cloth to it in butter; and keep it there until the cauterization is removed; after apply the ointment called "tetrapharmacos" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges. and for this reason, apply herbs.
And any of them said that the fire cautery should be applied so much that part of the bone is burned, and then the burned part of the bone should be removed and cleaned.
And another says that the cauterization should be left on until it blisters, and to apply it so strongly that it causes a blister as wide as the comb that women use in their hairpins, for this causes the fluids to move out.
and one must keep the wound widely open; after which one must treat and dress.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem entirely good in all respects, except for those who have a way to fear;
and it seems to me that I should let the fire cautery alone;
for the shoulders are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs;
and even when the patient's shoulders are weak by nature, and the first application of the fire cautery seems more helpful and soothing to me, and from that I work in this assembly for healing.
When in the entire body there comes chronic pain that lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie" and purgatives of head and eyes and plasters; and if we apply the fire cautery as we have said before, and it does not help. Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it not be too cold; then the cautery should be applied over that cautery a little as we have said above. After apply the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and apply the cautery or reset called "vasselz". and this is where one places cups; and lift your hand so that it does not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and the cautery for the horns should be finer than that used for the middle of the head, and this is the form:
for the fire cautery of the head When there is sudden pain in a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleansed with purgative medicines, and other treatments for the condition have been performed as I described in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say from aqueous medicine and fire.
The cauterization from aqueous medicine is that you take a decoction of aloes, and peel off the bark and rind just a little around two shoulders, and then apply the decoction underneath the skin in the area where the pain resides.
and when it is applied, it should be pressed well and left thus for twelve hours. and then remove the bandage and apply a dressing of garlic decoction, and leave the wound for two or three days. then place on a cloth soaked in butter until it dries out.
After the ointment treatment until he is healed;
and if you see that he uses some of the burning medicines that I have written or in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery using coal; it has the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clove or it has little curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance.
and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the flesh a bit until the halves of the core of the wound are burned.
and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is above, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
After apply cotton for the sake of the thread, put on the head for three days; then I put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the head with ointment until it is healed;
and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare," do it entirely around the edge, and be careful not to burn the artery in this headache which is not old.
of emigraine
When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization previously mentioned from medicine and of iron is not sufficient, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot;
and thus stretch over the bone a line of half a digit in length, and take your hand once, hold that so as not to compress the artery and not to come until the bone;
and watch the mandible that moves when we eat, and the nerves so they look only at the move and that spasm does not arise in the patient, and watch for bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding has great fear and especially to those who do not know it, and are untrained. and let the work proceed in its course;
but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
And if you see, administer the cautery as we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two blades; and this cautery is better and more effective than that one.
of the pain in the ears due to cold
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and you have applied medicinal solutions and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then heat this cautery called "poins," of which here is the form:
After puncturing all around the affected ear, or around both sides where the pain is felt, and then move a little bit upwards from the root of the ear after marking the area. and have X points between each ear;
after the wound is cleaned until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
and do not make any fire cautery for those that come from drying and fainting of nerves.
When you cure this form of torture that moves from phlegm in the fluids and purgatives of bile and gargling, and if it is ineffective, then you must cauterize the patient with three fire cauteries. One at the root of the ear, and the other a little above the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips;
and place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and apply the cautery over a little above the tip of the ear, and another one on the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery there until the muscles of the heart are burned.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the shape of the cautery that we placed before, but it is a bit more subtle, and it should be that the knives are a bit larger.
after the treatment of the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I apply four cauteries: On the two horns of the head, and one on the head, and one on the area called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the opening of the stomach;
and treat it as we have said before.
For lithargy
For this disease, give the patient large and purgative pills for cleansing the brain;
after resetting the patient's head, and placing it on the occiput, apply the mustard plaster described or treated in the section on plasters;
and this is the way of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is done thus, well done; and if it is not done thus, apply three cauteries down the back from the neck to the collarbone, with an inch of space between each cautery.
and treat the wound as with others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, apply one cautery in the middle. and if the task is, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healed;
and let the cautery which is called "olivare," as I have said before, be present.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of pus and what we have said before;
after clean the head of the patient, then heat the head of the patient, and apply the cautery through the head and on each horn, and the fourth and third on the spine of the neck;
and if you have more need of it, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, then apply four cautery marks on the spine of the back; and let them [the cautery] remain until the pain is less, and remove your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patients are great and suffer from gentle medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear the pain, have them perform gargling and chewing, frequently modifying the mixture with good meats.
after placing the king in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have said before, and on the vessel, and on each horn. and if the patient is strong and in great pain, apply the cautery as I have said for those with paralysis and muscle weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and use the olive cautery as I described.
If the patient is injured, if he undergoes the fine cautery according to this manner:
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt superfluities or thick phlegm, then the cautery with such cauteries as we have said for paralysis should be used.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink things by which his brain may be purified, according to those described earlier in the division.
After reduce the head of the patient; after make the ligature of linen well done, like a circle, and put it around the head;
and the patient lies stretched out, and be well held from all sides;
after present the ligature, and apply it with old goat's butter; and heat the iron well, so that the doze can be applied as long as it can be endured; after empty the circle from within through the head, and let it cool;
and do this to the patient once each week with another better regimen until he is healed.
If you see to cauterize him, make pricks in several places throughout the cautery.
This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly;
and then place soft cotton soaked in butter and gelatin fat on it.
from the fear of the eyes When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and have the patient drink things that cleanse the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After this, instruct him to turn his head, and apply a cautery under the chin, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the downward movements of the jaw are together with the eyes, or in one if the movement is in one.
and cover the entire area of the cautery with all the veins and arteries beneath the ear, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple.
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood come out, stop it with the same method you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the incision how to handle it.
And once done, cauterize or treat the two hindmost bones.
and when it is seen that they are cold phlegmatic excesses, then I do the cauterization that I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes. I cauterize at the back of the head, and two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations or treat the two hindmost bones. and if there is need for more, cauterize the bleeding from the sorcery with a small cautery.
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit the patient, then give the patient three noxious pigs to drink; after you set the head, and do a cauterization or in the middle of the olive cauterization; and do two cauterizations of the cauterization called "clavilis" above the two pigs, a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery so you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare". of which here is the form:
And if you see, make two fire cauteries above the two sinews as long as the sinews are;
and leave your hand there until the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which points to the eye Sometimes the hairs of the eyes turn to white teeth, and prick the eye, and then one makes fire cauteries according to two manners: that is to say with fire, or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are equal, then put the patient in a sound state; after marking on the paper the eyes, draw a figure that be as much like the leaf of the laurel, and be the beginning of the sign among the hairs;
then put moist cotton in egg white and myrtle wax on the eye, then heat the cautery as described by its form:
After cauterize on the figure you have marked, do so only a little bit many times, until the corners are scorched in place;
and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised to the outline of the eye;
then gently hold your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the burning is removed; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
And if hairs come after this, and the paper is softened, then resume the fire cautery in that same place, as you have done first.
and if the hairs are removed, then cauterize until the paper lifts to its natural place and remains even, and do not prick the hairs near the eye.
The fire cauterization in medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make parchment in the shape of the leaf of juniper.
then take of French soap and strong heat, of each one .Z., and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then apply it to the form as you made it like the leaf of juniper, and place on the paper of eyes; and if the disease is only in the eye, one must open it, and if it is in both as well; and place moist cotton from an egg white over the eye;
and the head of the patient be in a good position and place your hand showing over the medicine, and press it slightly and the egg each time the patient feels the medicine biting, for they feel the bite as from fire.
When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your duty. And when the swelling has passed, lift the limb from rest, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
If not, apply the medicine to the limb again or until your treatment shows results, and keep your eyes focused.
then place soft cloth with butter on it until the wound is healed, after which dress the limb with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until he is cured.
And if you need to watch your work well with great care so that it does not fail in the application of the medicine.
And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair pricks in the eye, resume the treatment on that limb which is softened by the paper, as you did before. after the treatment until he is healed;
and it is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:
And know that men's eyes vary in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints;
and do not follow the right way for him who studies this art.
For the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
instruct the patient to place his head on your side; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor his head;
after, place woolen cloth in the white of an egg or in the juice of pomegranate on the eye;
after heating the cautery which is divided:
and it is placed on the shoulder in the shape of an arrow feather, ensuring that the cautery fits.
if you see, it should be pointed from one shoulder to the other, and if you see, it should be like a tent.
but in any case, what is placed should move for your work.
after press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus, and dry it. and if it is closed, work on it, and drain from the bowel.
after placing the hot cautery, hold your hand at the part above the neck next to the eye, so that your hand does not do foolish things; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well. If not, repeat the application of the cautery once more, and do this if you need to, and leave it for three days;
afterwards, place moist cotton soaked in butter on it, and continue the application of the drying ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a watery corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. and follow the king's instruction according to what he has written in his chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Hear about fistula, and set it right; after insert the fine wax thread of hemp into the opening to shape it: and make it with the quantity of a .3. drop; and hold your hand or the thread firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted wax does not flow into their eye;
and it is necessary to place over the eye a wet piece of cotton or from an egg:
the wax seals the fistula, and the healthy part with marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, that is good. And if not, it is fitting to administer pertusin to the neck, and bring the fistula back to the body of the neck according to what is proper in itself.
of cracks in lips Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
When the cure for these cracks, as we said in divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery knife according to this form:
And place it quickly into those cracks until it comes to the surface;
after dress the wound until it is healed.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the eye socket, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after performing putrefaction and drilling and it has healed and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it will not profit much: then you must have the fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the bottom of it, and beyond it;
and do so once or twice after the treatment as described in our treatments until he is healed;
and if it is treated thus, that is good; and if not, you must expose the joint and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it does not help, then place the patient's healthy side in the affected area. after heating the cautery as described later in such a manner that you place a cane on the tooth.
and insert the hot cautery quickly inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after removing your hand, reapply the cautery as you see fit;
after make the patient lick salt water, and for the scabies, one hour and thoroughly dry.
And in such a manner, the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
of the pain of teeth
When pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use the cautery according to two methods: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
The butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it in a iron or tin spoon; after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and the marrow in butter boiled, and put on the tooth hurting quickly and hold until it be cooled;
and so do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see soft wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron hot until the fire comes to the healing of the tooth.
The fire cauterizes as such that you take a steel or iron needle, and let it be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
after heat the cauterizer, of which the form will come next, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer be cooled;
Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that same day or the next.
And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cautery, and then quickly apply it.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make the cautery where you wish, and according to what you have power to do.
and this is the form of the cane:
of gland swellings When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described below. Let it have two openings for the vapors to escape from the other side.
and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the center of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and apply moist cotton soaked in butter until the burn is removed;
afterwards apply ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the moist humors overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with soluble medicines.
after you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and make sure that you do not come too close to the throat, but do heat the heart a little bit, just a bit.
After, apply the other cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" be as we have shown their form before;
and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and the disease of the bowel is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and does not dry up, and the disease is old, apply two cauteries on the flank in their armpits; and for another cautery place the point between the two mamels;
and let the cautery that is called "clavile" be according to the form that is said before.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking the entire area called "poins" whose form is described earlier in the disease of the ears.
and let the "poins" be up to XXX, or nearby.
After the treatment of the shoulder as previously mentioned, let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, since you make three of them together.
from the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, anoint the patient's back and side. afterward, lift the heart that is within the titillite with your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two nooses with which its form is made:
and cauterize the heart until it perforates to the costeit, and bring together the figure of the cautery with four cauteries;
and for this purpose the cautery is made with one that has three nooses, so that the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries;
and the nooses follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nooses:
And once adjusted above this first nerve, because of which there are eight cauteries.
After place the cautery with heated coals on salt; after making the patient rest, and let not the limbs be moved for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated upwards, little happens, then apply the fire cautery on the thick part of the joint, or several cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, thus healing the patient.
When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach because it is contrary to his constitution, and the catarrh multiplies in him, and methods of treatment are accustomed but do not benefit him, then the patient should be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands. After this, make three cautery marks above the heel according to the size of a coin, on each cautery use a needle-cautery, and two cautery marks below the two flanks such that the shape of the cautery marks forms three angles and there is space between each other so they do not join together when putrefaction occurs.
and let the cautery marks be so complete that they penetrate the two parts of the thigh, and let the shape of the cautery marks follow this form without adjustment.
And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach according to this form;
and he who is afraid of this cautery, prick and bleed at the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see fit. then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "poins".
After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great wind, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion due to excess. and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and if it does not profit him, then the patient must be treated on his liver. and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, over the hypochondria, where the gallbladder is located.
and there should be space between each cautery the size of a thumb; and let the cauteries be as long as the torso, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
and let it be burned only halfway to the heart, and let the patient lie straight on his back.
and if it cannot lie on its back, let it be supine and extend its legs, and elevate its arms.
and if you wish to burn these cauteries of the liver, be subtle and skilled in the art, and make sure you do not burn the entire heart, for you would dry up the whole body. and let it not come to a boil, for the veins are very delicate there, and one must be careful to see.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
and if it is in the capsule, the pain is intense.
And when this treatment reaches the membranes, it is necessary that the patient be anesthetized at its head.
and then cut the vein or the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a ray of sun, as its form is: And apply the fire cautery until the scars are arid, and continue until syphilis comes, until the eruptions are completely gone;
after the treatment according to the treatment of sores until they are healed;
and it is not fitting to use this cautery except by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Then he can boldly operate, and always it seems to me that women value it.
for the cautery of pleuresin
The ancients said that one should make the fire cautery from roots of aristolochia, and in such manner: take one root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, making it as thick and as long as you need; and the marrow in oil, and impress with fire, and cauterize with the fire between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small fires a little descending in the part below the chin;
and two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and one cauterization between the buttocks, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the back below the cauterization between the shoulders;
and do not press your hand much, but apply it openly as in anointing.
And an ancient said that no man uses the fire cauterization in place of shaving, and heats it and places it between the ribs until it comes to that abscess. and when the pain is gone, as we have said for the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula arises which cannot be cured.
from the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Of which there is a manner such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
and do not press your hand too much on the cautery, and let the patient often lie on his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is near the mouse, or where the stitches of the patient come to the left side, and let the elevations on which you lift the heart be according to the shape of the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After pouring out the two flaming wicks until their cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will be four.
And if you see, cautery the entire cautery to three wicks.
After the treatment when it has rotted for a long time, and this must be done differently from the previous wounds.
The cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
When you cure it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help much, then you must make four cauteries around the wound, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the wick.
After let the cautery open to drain putridity long enough, and do not delay the treatment of the patient after the cautery. and the healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be combined with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the claw-like one that we have shown before; and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, according to what was mentioned before.
When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ring finger. and hold your hand with the fire cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn yellowish, and let the cauterizes be according to this form:
after make on each leg two cauteries at the tip of the cuticular; and let the cauteries be long, one above the knee in front and the other below, between the legs;
and leave the cauteries on for a long time without curing, until the ache subsides;
after the treatment of other wounds as we have said.
when the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, since the retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by methods of wound care; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, make the great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about earlier or stomach cautery, in the cautery circle; and four small cauteries between the lips for each small cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, make him undergo the fire cautery on the armpit, and two cauterizations on each leg, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are internal or external, and are old and are large cold and moist humors腐化, and are treated as we have said in the sections, and it does not improve, then make cauteries: Three on the spine of the back, that one just above the iliac crest a little bit at a time in a triangular manner, and one cautery below the lip two digits.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the fat swelling, then heat the fat on the stomach as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire cautery. and let the cautery remain long enough. After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is sane.
When you cauterize the ulcer, heat the cautery until it seems red-hot, and then apply it completely burning over the ulcer being treated. and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that it heals.
do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, cauterize each one as we have said. after the application of ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery over the navel, it will have greater aid.
When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will describe in its place, comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
When there is a fistula and it is infected with decayed pus and moisture, you should probe the entire length of the wound with a sharp probe, and ensure that you know the full length of the wound.
heat the cautery until it seems red-hot, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the pus has entered, and reapply the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned, one time, or two or three times, according to the quantity needed.
and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these areas, and do not perform this outside the fatty tissue, and think that it is not harmful.
after the treatment of the eye until it is healed, and if the eyes are inflamed, and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the eyes are completely healed;
and if the materials have not been removed, know that the eye is inflamed, and the bone is corrupted. and in the manner as one of those that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes with strong winds, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must cauterize the sides of the ribs on both sides with the claw cautery as we have already mentioned.
and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will do more great aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder, where the hairs begin at the base of the penis, both on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as one inch.
and make the cautery below the spine, or where you may need it;
and let the cauteries be of the shape as previously described.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries on the cheek, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two behind the back;
and let the cauteries be on the arm, as we have said.
When slimy moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place; the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and find the location from which the slimy moisture departs, and it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the location within the socket as it turns, so that the socket lies within the circle.
and if the cauteries are such as those from which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if such cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of olive oil great, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the quires.
and continue the treatment until he is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division, and the treatment is ineffective, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good pills similar. After you perform the fire cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and the fire cautery.
The fire cautery is carried out in many ways, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form, and do them to good depth and large, with an space the width of a thumb between each cautery, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
sometimes the cauterization is done in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have already mentioned before regarding the dislocation of the hip.
but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the points of the knee be arsed.
And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side slightly.
and let the cauterizations be with a lancet, and sear the thickness of the knee.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two points of the foot or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four cauterizations called "poins. And if the task is, let him do more;
And if the pain is from below the knee to the thigh, then make a fire cautery with a cutellar or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on too long so as to burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it on too long until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were pierced and corrupted. After a belly purge from which he died.
And if the pains are in two parts together, perform a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise men said about the cautery for the hip, as follows: make the iron such that it is at the head as thick as a nail's head, or a bit less, and let it be jagged, and let it be between the fingers and be from one finger's breadth to another of the quantity of a nut's length;
and let the splints be over two parts, and be also like nuts, and have one iron hand well made.
and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is completely red and emit sparks, and then place it on the socket of the injured hip, and turn it towards the healthy side.
and let the cautery be applied once the heat is reduced and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long enough. after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its sight, and we see few who use it.
and wherever this is well cauterized, who can bear it, and let it be where it adheres.
The cautery for burning medicine is made by preparing an instrument of tongs in which the margin of the mouthpiece descends, and it should be made of tin or iron on one side long, and at the height of two nails, and each should have the size of a thumb. and be open at the top and above, and join together according to this form.
After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side with the healthy side up, and pressing your hand firmly on the hip box; after pouring between the two circles of the hot awe for a little while heated on fire, and let it remain one hour or so, and allow the patient to endure the heat and the burning.
Because there is also a bite from a fire.
and when the bite has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and lift the awed side gently, and leave it for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the scalding is removed. and let it remain for three days that the putrefaction draws out;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, apply the tool that hurts awe according to what you did for the hip equally;
and this is the way of the hot awe, and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. or there be the small hole pierced such that the point of a razor may be able to enter;
or there be the small hole pierced such that the point of a razor may be able to enter; and place in it another that is well weighted, and put on alkali and wax and mild awe, as much as there are two on top of the powders as you will have well impressed with your hand;
and leave it thus until the wax and lead descend in the awe. Then take all that awe, and throw it on wax and alkali as before.
And then it will become very wet and is administered in degrees of medicinal works and other limb cauteries.
For it makes great work like fire, and with other medicines where one cauterizes well the hip as with tinese and honey of anacard and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment where a noble was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and the loincache, and says that no other treatment was done, and he was cured at one time when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And it is said in such a manner that you take fresh and dry litharge green, and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and mix it;
and he leaves it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make him go to bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be cured.
And know that no one should use such a cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauteryed with sheep's fat, it greatly helps;
and the cautery must be made in such a manner. Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the depression between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
After taking dry sheep's fat, hold it over fire until it becomes hot coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is cool;
and do this again, and continue in this manner until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and the pain is ceased.
and this manner of cautery is called "sheep cautery.
of the pain from the back
When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or due to too great an evacuation or similar to matter expanded cold, none of these circumstances calls for cautery, though it may be necessary for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It must be that the patient is free of foul pills or other similar things, and upon their back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with enche, in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
and the cauteries should be done according to the cautery called "poins";
and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavicle according to this form:
Many times this illness comes upon small children, and the signs of the beginning are that their throat is narrow when they arise, and fear; and you find at the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
When you see this and find it needs to be treated, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form. That the cauterization for each part of the spine increases accordingly.
And if you see, cauterize between the spines with a painful fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
After the treatment of the limb until it is healed as we have said, and make sure you do not apply a fire cautery to swelling that is in the spasm of a nerve.
of joint pain
And when joint pains are due to moistures spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by applications of medicines, it is cured by cautery in such a manner:
make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to this form:
And if there is need to prick the sole of the foot, let the cautery be as large as what we call "point. And if the pains come as far as the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make cauteries on each knee III or IV in each part, for the entire cautery with olive oil:
and if you have need of more, do more, but not to keep your hand away for longer than until the coals of the fire are extinguished.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, apply the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks around the wrist two lines;
and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make pricks at each joint and above the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come as far as the elbows or as far as the shoulders, cautery each part, and give good governance to the patient and prudent medicines.
For if you give it good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
And when rupture comes in veins, and the bulges descend to the groin and this is newly occurring, then it is necessary that when you see them incised, he not eat at all that day; and when he uses things that alleviate the belly, so that the phlegm descends from his belly;
after placing it on its back between your hands, and instruct him to stretch its belly until the boils are healed, then reduce them with your fingers and mark a line under the break in the bone of the arm, and make sure the mark is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery coal that has the form:
while it remains white and gives off scents. then reduce the boils to their place; and the minister stretches his hand so that the boils do not return;
and tend well to the thighs of the patient, and place a cushion and a mat over the thighs, and another over the foot that gives pain to the hands;
then place the cautery on the mark on your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the bone the first time, repeat another time until you come to the bone; and carefully ensure that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery; and do not burn it; and that the patient does not die from this, or other harms.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your efforts amount to nothing.
And it must be that the cauteries for children are fine according to the measure of their size, and those for adults as large according to their measure.
after three days, cure the skin around the butter cautery until the scalding is removed.
after the initial treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
and it must be that the poultices are applied for a long time, so that the boils do not come to a head when he goes into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage, and keep it for another forty days.
and have good rest, that he works little and guards against too great fullness from drinking and eating, and from too loud shouting;
and when he follows this instruction, he is completely cured.
And I will say after the treatment to shave in his chapter.
When ruptures occur in other organs and are known, and you see that they do not increase, then apply the fire cautery as many times as necessary according to their quantity, and let it burn for one-third of the time. after the treatment as we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this form:
but mark the midpoint of the wound and draw a line along its width above the rupture, and another below it, and run your hand through all the cautery points.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
from old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twists and its pain.
if it is healed from the first cautery, it is well;
if this name, recommence with another cautery on that one, because such custom is that it must change to the part nearest to it, so you must make the cauteries as long as the patient is healed.
The diseases are sometimes aided once by the fire cautery with great help, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cannot you see the patient needs cautery, take care that the disease is at the beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither spreads nor remains, and if you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then you make five cauteries on the head: I place the cautery on the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and on the two horns, and the rear one on the scapula;
and let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the bark is removed so that the vapors of the excess humors can escape.
and cauterize on the mouse according to what is said before.
And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and if it is clearly effective, then you must cauterize with the cautery as we have said or chief, and the third on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the shoulder blade and another on the side, and two on the two shoulders; and two over the shins, and two over the tendons of the foot, one over each joint of the hands and feet, and over the depressions of the hands;
and take care of the nerves that are over the buttocks, so you do not burn them;
and once the fire cautery is done on the bone of the thigh, one more on the bone of the abdomen, and one more on the liver.
And know that the more fire cauteries you perform, the more aid you provide, and they profit from it;
And know that the sick do not feel pain from the fire cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you will find in kinds of iron.
After the cure, apply a paste of flour and honey with other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization be a little deeper in the thickness of the knee. then treat with ointments until it is healed.
And sometimes the cauterization is done with a hot iron and on the back, at the end of the nerve that causes the limb to lose movement, and thus the swelling is removed.
and in any case, no one should intervene unless they know the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize with a slightly hot cautery, according to the thickness of the keratin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
then treat with a cure of flour of vervain and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from colen and blood from alondra, each in part; and mix all together, and wrap with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
the cauterization of the chancre
When the chancre begins and you see it stop, cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
And the sage said that one should also cauterize at the center of the sore.
and in all ways it seems to me not good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have had it happen this way more than once.
and more improper is that it be cauterized between, in the cautery called "circule," as we have said when discussing cauteries.
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death either due to its excess or because of the acidity of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old), and the patient has little blood, or due to the tension; and you see it hasten its death: then the cauterization is done with many small cauteries pricking. after he lets it be thus. Car she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced through the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the other side in this manner so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a corrosion of the member, for it eats away at the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
If you see this disease in a patient who can bear the entire fire cauterization, then heat the cautery claws very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the part or where the disease is.
after the cauterization from all sides until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that everything which is corrupt be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and place on the cauterized parts a sufferable dressing with oil until the burn marks from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the application of ointments producing flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good.
and if not, resume the fire cautery on that which is delayed from the corrupted parts.
And this mixture has been cured with medicinal water instead of the fire cautery once.
but still, the fire cautery is of greater help. I have already mentioned the treatment with medicinal water in the division. take the quantity you need.
of blisters that come to the feet Many times, at the feet due to fires, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that hardens the foot.
And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, the fire cauterization, and the hot aqueous cauterization.
Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery tip as if it were the shaft of a cinder-tooth (a type of implement), and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can hold a nail from all sides, and it should have thin edges.
after heating it up on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail; and let it be thus for three days until it begins to rot with pus; then apply a plaster of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the plaster on all through the night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Then anoint the limb with healing ointment until it is healed.
And if they have been converted by fire on the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to it. and it is in such a manner: take a needle of iron or a branch of willow, and place it on the nail and the althea, that is to say for warts; and place the needle so that it burns completely around, then put some hot awn on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning it such that the edge of the needle comes to the base of the nail, and then find the hot awn deep path all the way to the base.
and let the patient endure for a while the burning from the hot awn for an hour. then leave it like this, and it will fall off completely with all its roots.
Make one after another until you dry all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that are caused by burns.
When any person trembles from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or other ailments, it is fitting that you make four or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. and one cautery at the waist, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery.
and let it trembling, and hasten the recovery of the health of the cold illness.
At times apparent through the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large corrupted matters.
then it is fitting at the first when they appear that you make a cautery on each head of the pustule. a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the tip being set on fire, or of long aristole root, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cauterization one begins when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not permit growth of tumors in front, but the excesses from which they come are broken off, and they are healed.
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great losses of blood from the artery which is cut by the wound or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the member, and similar things. and it is most foul to smell.
And in any case, when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the bleeding stops beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
then heat the olive cauteries, both small and large, until they are entirely red.
then apply it, whether large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery runs, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your hand, and keep the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
And if it leaps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are used, so take quickly another from the cauteries that are in the flame.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is coagulated;
and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot coagulate it well by itself when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have said: or by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to draw out blood; and may be tied and held at the onset.
Who will treat the stench from lime closely with cloths or put burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then it should be discontinued.
And if this happens to anyone and they have neither mirror nor medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it well so that it is drawn out above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the thread, but moisten it often with cold dew that it may be very cold until the blood is frozen and collected and drawn out;
and make incisions in front of the parts that require cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter where it is fitting to use the fire cautery or the cautery of burning medicines, and the blisters and their causes and the instruments and the forms of the cauteries;
and I have set out this chapter from the hand to the foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way as one finds it more easily.
And since I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; or there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you undertake no folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if coming from those who are so affected by their illness that they die slightly due to the fear they find in their illness, and because of the severity of their malady; and from these one must have fear.
And of these, some give their sense and say: wait, I am healed"; and the illness is sudden.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you and have this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not readily give of what you are uncertain, but only of what you can take and lose;
and use pronouncement and indication in the treatment of your patients for their health to be converted;
and he will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Very dear friend, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have instructed this chapter by discussing it section by section, as I did in the chapter on fire cauteries, where I spoke of the head down to the feet, because you will find it more easily comprehensible.
Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the birthing hands hold too tightly the head of the child.
and sometimes it comes from a cause that we do not know.
And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among those I have seen, many died quickly. And because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the work in partial treatments.
And I saw the child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head was growing larger each day to the point it could no longer support it.
and the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture is gathered around the bone above the scaphoid, between the heart and the bone.
and the operations must be such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a wide incision through the head.
and let it be as long as two of our fingers, so that the moisture can drain.
and see the form of the spatumile:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see at the corners of the shoulder for each part, and the sharp pain when you press it from within with your hand, this does not concern you: it is necessary that you make three cuts in the shoulder in this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture out. After dressing the cuts with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days;
then release it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the shoulder strengthen gradually. Then give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incising is that you look for where the abscess is largest, and the collection of pus;
for it never occurs before; no time behind; no time on the right; and no time on the left.
Cut accordingly where the abscess is largest, and where the collection of pus is, making the incision according to your ability;
and be sure not to cut the artery; and let the blood flow freely, so that the patient heals through the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the testicles, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the last remedy is the cautery with that of which one will cauterize the two arteries.
Therefore, when you are to see the patient, the sick person must turn their head; after rubbing the area with an abrasive cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove the sick person's collar completely; then look where the vein is located, and the ears are behind both sides, and they are slightly raised;
then mark the edges with ink, then incise both sides with a sharp spatulum in two parts, until the vein is cut to the bone, and this should be done on the wide part of the head.
And if you see, place the spatule over the artery and cut above it, cutting as much as twice through.
And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open with pressure, then measure the quantity of three doux, mark with ink, and cut until the bone.
and what must be let out of the blood is 6 quarts, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery;
then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone point of syphilis, and the abscess does not come to a head, then incise the wound and apply a dressing, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Of emigrainne When ancient emigrainne comes, and acute cataract, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and old, ancient fever and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicinal treatments and all such means do not benefit it, then extract the arteries in the temples and use cautery, as we have recounted.
And the method for extracting them is that the patient should pull from the hairs of his temples, and feel for the artery that appears in the temple, for it appears well by its pulsation, and is little displaced in some people who are too cold.
and if it is bound, draw the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the back with a rough cloth, and wash the back with hot water until the arteries appear clearly. then take the spatula of copper that is in the form: then cauterize the skin lightly until you see the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and pull away all the threads that are beneath each part;
and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the bisturi, then cut that part according to the size of the two shoulders. For if it is not cut, neither will the stone pass completely through.
and draw blood from six parts, until three;
and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong threads of silk, that putrefaction not arise before the suddenness of the wound, and prevent hemorrhage.
then cut the excess skin between the two threads in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, apply the cautery of the surgical cautery to the bone until the shoulder is severed.
and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion. For the cauteries are help to finish the moistures: for it is of greater help in finishing the moistures.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries to fill the cavity with old cotton and place something well-made over it;
and when they are removed, it should be treated with dry medicinal substances that promote healing, and with bandages until it is healed;
and if there is no cord from the artery as much as you work, then hasten to cauterize with fire, or fill the cavity with vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that it dries up; and if you do not have this at hand, place on the cavity your finger so that it dries, and remove the cotton with cold water until it is saturated, and hold it steady as it should be;
And it should have between the two knives a thickness of good space, and when you have joined the two ends, then place the hot iron on it until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two parts. and let them be spaced apart between the two heads because they are not joined together by this cautery from end to end.
and this is the form of the cautery:
and he who is more weakened and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery in two parts, but the cutting edges be well thick to hold longer their heat. For when the instruments are too cold, they hold less heat.
of tears When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the side of the head, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel tremors on the forehead as if from shivering. and when they are held and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall out, and the papers become heated, and scalded by the heat of the tears, it needs this treatment. And the ancients called it "bruised wound treatment," and you should do this for a patient who has this illness: have them lie on their back and mark the hairs they have or on their forehead, then make three equal divisions or grooves on the forehead according to its length.
And the ancients called it "bruised wound treatment," and you should do this for a patient who has this illness: have them lie on their back and mark the hairs they have or on their forehead, then make three equal divisions or grooves on the forehead according to its length. and let one of the grooves be just like the other two all along the forehead downward to the neck, and the others on both sides above the papers, and take care not to incise the arteries that are above the papers on both sides.
and move your hand away from the continuity of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the size of three doyles through joined.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and a bit of cloth to wipe the blood, then apply the sharp end of the spatula from both sides where it is formed.
from the incision which is down to the second incision; and cauterize the entire heart that is between the two grooves until the subcutaneous tissue above the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove firmly this spatula. if you insert into the first cut the instrument called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is a scoop, not sharp, and this is its form:
And place the blade cutting towards the buttock at the core, and the scoop blade towards the bone, and keep it in place until it reaches the middle cut.
and cauterize all the vessels that descend to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that appear on the heart, then do the same from the middle groove to the other opening.
and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the limb for the blood taken;
then place a tent of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with moistened cloths in wine and oil and grease, and keep the abscesses from forming.
and on the third day release the bandage, and apply great plantain in hot water, then treat with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
When someone frequently gets acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening of vision, and burned papers; and the hair itches, and when they scratch at the pain, the patients sneeze; then know from these accidents that those materials and the catharrhe do not come forth only from many veins, and the more they are cured, so it is.
And you should instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one of lesser width. And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let it be an incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dry between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, and line it with linen; then bind above with moist cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess.
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with excipients that promote flesh growth.
In a similar manner: take 2 parts of flour of wheat, and 4 parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and administer this in the wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
of the blocking of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like grain, beans, peas; or fluid-like substances like water and oils and similar things.
When it falls into the ear a stone or some other kind of thing that does not stick to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, and it exudes any drop of violet oil or silk worm oil, then proceed with its extraction. and cause the patient to sneeze by condisi, and stop the nose with a plug when the sneezing begins, and place in the ear pieces of cloth or wool. and put the ear above.
Many times a fistula comes about from this treatment;
and if it does not come about, the patient undergoes the extraction with subtle forceps, of which its form is this:
If it bursts with the forceps, that is good;
and if not, the patient undergoes the extraction with the fine hook of small curvature;
and if it does not burst with that, make a spider's thread and insert the end of the thread or a hole in the ear firmly, and plug around the thread with soft wax so that the fistula cannot enter with the thread; then let the treatment continue, for often it comes to force as we have said;
and if it does not come to force in any way, take glue of gum and take the awls, and put in some instrument which is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton between; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and force the treatment.
and if it does not come to force from all these things that we have said, hasten to incise the ear as one would an abscess filled with pus and decayed tissue.
and the manner of the incision is that you first anesthetize the patient with the shoulder treatment, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends. and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
and continue the treatment until he is healed.
And if it is a grain that is embedded and inflamed, administer the extraction;
and if it cannot come out, administer the spatule with a fine blade according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this if you think the grain is moist from ear moisture, until you have made many pieces.
then extract it with fine tongs and in suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
In the water that falls into the ear, then the patient should use nose blowing with initial conditions, and plug the ear with old cotton. And let them lie on that same ear where the water is. If it drains forcefully through that, that is good.
if not, take several stones according to the length of your strong and light hand, and heat them slightly on fire; and place one or two of his ear stones on it. Strike from another side with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and continue to strike the stone on the stone until the fluid runs out completely, and then it will run out completely;
and if you see, take a rush, and place one of the heads in the ear, and the other head over fire until the rush is well heated;
then repeat with other rushes until the fluid runs out completely, as we have said in the case of the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is of large size that can be felt, apply the extraction with forceps; and it is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and for distillations, and the cure does not help much, then you should look at the ear with the sun. if there are no worms apparent, draw them out with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, use the wire of the form.
And it is narrow inside and wide outside. And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then proceed gradually to the entire canal; Do this often enough that all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, stuff the canal with cotton as I have said in the case of the stone.
And if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find them discussed in treatises on distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which the form is as you see: And let it be of thin silver or tin, below the small hole, and above the spout for distillation.
And for pressing within the distillation to the well-made instrument of tin, and if you wish take the rasp and envelop around the tip akin to cotton. Then throw in your oil or juice, and what you wish from your medicines into the wick, and the wick be in the ear.
Then pour the rasp into all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or movement of the ear. And let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated on the fire as if one were distilling in the ear. and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the blocking of the ears
No child is born who has no perforations in the ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound clot or flesh grown inside the ear, and these clots sometimes do not allow them to be seen in the ear.
and sometimes the perforation is only partially blocked, and one can see through it well.
That which is blocked and one cannot see through it, often requires careful treatment, and in such cases, you should place the ear of the patient in the sun. and look within: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this spatumile of which this is formed:
And be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, so that it does not damage the ear;
if the operation is on cartilage or tissue of the ear, use fine forceps, and gently scrape it until all the cartilage is removed.
And if the excision is performed in the ear, take the fine razor gently and heat it a little on fire, then place it over the ear wax.
If you sense the operation where the patient feels pain in the ear, gently puncture it, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the puncture, and fill it with Egyptian ointment. Make this for any day while the wound is healing, or take a tent and marrow in rosewater, and powder on ground glass.
and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary to treat the tent and move another wet tent made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed. then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are or involve distillation.
This is the herb that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dried. It is necessary to spread them with tongs and forceps, and the decoction of a spathillum from its roots. then put on the glass ground.
And if without scraping, cauterize with the thin lens cautery, and the cauterizer after incision moves.
and often return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the hailstone. Many times on the eyelids come papers that appear like hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large within the paper above and below. The operations are such:
The operations are such: take heed of the one who is mute on both sides, and this is a light matter to know;
then cut it open wide, then brandish each part lightly, then take it with the tongs, and clamp it.
if you cannot clamp it without piercing a bit the paper, then do not harm the patient;
and if the cut is large, suture it up, and treat it until it heals;
and if it is small, do not apply much force, for the ointments will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
and if the shoulder is dislocated inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and expose the shoulder with tongs, and clamp and press it from both sides.
and if the paper is removed by the incision, it matters not;
and when the boil is cut, rinse the eye with salt water, and treat the wound with what flows from it until the patient is healed.
from the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is extracted from the rags of paper bags, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly harms their eyes, causing catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes.
and because of this, they lie on their faces down, and sleep thereon, and have their papers beneath them that are moist with exinach which inflames and conceals the appearance in their eyes. And when you press on the shoulder between your fingers and feel the exinach within.
And the manner of the work is such that the patient places their head on your side;
and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains outside each part, then put it on; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the outside parts are gathered within the circle;
and make in the middle of the moisture a slit with a sharp spoon, and let it not be any wider than the incision we make in the healthy vein;
and open the skin thoroughly until you see the outside parts; and in many positions there comes out from the wound exudate according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Draw out then entirely one piece of cloth between thy two fingers at the wound, and turn thy hand to right and left until it is dispersed;
and keep that thou dost not adder in the wound, that thou come not to all the space until the eye, that thou bleach it.
And if the exudate does not open at the beginning of the wound, so enlarge a bit the wound lightly until it opens.
then draw out as we have said, then weten with a cloth and in water, and put upon the wound, and drain of lint.
And if such men who grind grain and put it there to腐化 those remaining moistures.
Then treat until he is healed.
And if there is an abscess hot in the wound, treat with soothing poultices until it is healed.
of the hairs of paper When in papers grow hairs different from the natural ones, and are established, they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
and it is the treatment according to four methods: or by fire cautery altogether with heat, or by aqueous medicine as in the chapter on cautery, and it is done or by incision and suturing or by cantharides, according to what I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick with a needle along the entire thread; and let the thread be on the edge of the paper where the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the thread up across the entire paper, and shave it with a razor;
then cut in the part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, all the way to the sputum hole from the large hair down to the small one;
then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, then sprinkle on the paper an amount like the leaf of juniper, as you see fit for the quantity removed from the paper which is divided for all.
And if there is someone who needs it, one should use a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper has been softened.
then fill the spatula up to two lines that you have marked, and begin with the large spoon until small. and let one be a groove near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour an ounce into one of the two corners of the ear, then cauterize it completely.
then缝合两个唇部用一根细羊毛线穿过针眼，然后擦去血迹，并在两条丝线上刮除多余的线头，如果你打算这样做。
and if you do not, then do not worry about it, simply leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days.
then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and binding substances, for the paper remoistens suddenly from the wound and its assembling, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear; and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and if you moisten the paper with a shape that is as large as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, sew it on three sides according to the form which is described:
then apply those that surpass the small forces evenly according to the form which is given here:
And if you do not have the strength to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, take an needle with one thread, and sew through the shape; and pull out one thread from the large wick, and the second thread from the small one, and join the two threads evenly;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have marked, as we have recounted, then join the two edges of the wound by suturing, and treat until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a plaster and similar soothing ointment;
and sometimes the hair of the paper is converted:
then you must use what we have said about the incision:
but the stitch on one side and the other is more artificialized.
The treatment for canine teeth is according to this form: and you must convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two canine teeth by art, and two ligaments also long as the paper and as wide as the spacing is. and hold the threads at the head of the part where you have the fibers.
then assemble the one and the other delicately on what surmounts from the paper of the oil, and hold the two canine teeth from the two parts firmly. and let it thus for some days, and the skin which is constrained will die, wither, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, and the wound has strength, then treat it until it heals.
and when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted, the hairs will not grow anymore.
and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
the operation is such that you take a sharp needle, and thread through it thin and subtle. then join the heads and tie both subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long;
then arrange in the chase another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the threads together;
then place the patient's head on your side;
and keep away from the sun so that the work be clear, for it is a delicate and small operation. Then place the needle throughout the chase at the root of the added hair, and pierce the paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair.
then extract the hair until it reaches the chase, and place that hair in the chase if there is one or two or three or more.
then draw out your hand when the hairs have grown outside completely through the paper with the natural hair.
And if the paper is treated and the hairs do not come through with it, draw out the paper from around all the threads that you have ordered, until the paper comes through completely above and you see it with the eye's sight;
Then draw out the paper and the threads, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 days or 3, until the hair grows in its place and flesh appears above.
And if the hair is small, accompany it with a long natural hair, and lift it along with that one or leave it, until it stretches, then release it.
of the putrefaction of the oil When this illness which is called "aleacrait" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways of it:
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or surgery, or the fire cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you cut the seam, and separate the edges of it, and put within sutures of linen, and bind it tightly until it is healed;
and it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of such things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first.
but use things that soften, such as fenugreek. and let the application of water or vinegar and linseed that have been cooked, and unguents melted in any oil, be applied, and wrap it in a cloth.
And the dressing of your wound is that you take care that it does not heal improperly according to the form it had before.
and these works that we have said must be applied such that the illness does not return according to the form it had before.
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things.
and the method of the work is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and sew into the flesh, and make the thread pierce from left to right so that the threads pass through two heads of the flesh.
then the flesh is drawn above to all the needle, and the skin to the broad surface. And if the shape of the paper figure returns as it should, that is good;
and if not, take the scissors and place them in the裂口，然后转动纸张，在纸内侧形成两个裂口；
and let the heads of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision you have made, and make angles such that when they are assembled, the shape is as in the shape of a letter which has an "I" or "griesche".
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that your fingers are able to grasp from beneath, then join the two severed parts, and stitch them with a linen thread.
then apply the treatment of what we have said regarding softening medicines and bandages until he is cured.
And if the illness comes from a wound or suture or fire cautery, it is necessary that you make a full incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before. then separate between the two flaps of a dressing, as I have said;
then separate between the two flaps of a dressing, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the masters prepare means of all their power to make the body return to its natural form.
and the patient himself, according to what needs to be done and instruments in various preparations.
When this seam happens to men in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then you must therefore put the point of a razor beneath the paper and lift it up.
and remove with forceps, until you take out what is attached to the thin membrane, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from the thin membrane being too sharp and blistering the eye.
and make your incision, which you burn together gently, so that the paper returns according to its natural form.
and the entire assembly is healthy, and do this not once in the eye that is sore and salty, and rinse it with sweet water, and from anger.
then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put over the eye moistened wool from an egg. and after the third day use a colander and dark things until he is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles hard syphilis, and another which is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture, such that when touched with iron and treated with tweezers, it cannot be removed.
and both resemble starting from the large lid and gradually increasing a little by little until they cover the entire field of vision and all light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of incising is such that the patient places their head on your lap, then open their eyes; and hold the paper with your hand, then place the nail against the forceps of small size, and extend it above; then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or a cow, or a bull, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and stitch through the nail, piercing it completely with the needle. Hold the nail steady above and burn along the side of the nail that has the groove and the thread to the hair until reaching the root, then cut off the remaining part with fine forceps and small strength, leaving the natural skin or horn at the root, so that the body does not weep tears through this incision as it is accustomed to doing.
and sometimes the nail grows on its own, and on the thread, as we have said; then the scorching affects all the spatumile_soup of which this is the form:
And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the prunelle remains intact;
and after the incision, pour some burned salt into the eye, and from a necklet made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the pins cannot enter it, often this resemblance of a nail is treated with medicines.
and grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it copulate, work the eye of the patient gently with a sharp but light spatule according to this form: And gently scrape the nail upwards, and if you see that it thins at all and the root presses on it, distill from your mouth into the eye of the mixture made of litharge and red colchicum and salt, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is contrary in the eye, such as an abscess, then let it alone, and first treat the warm abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
then resume the other operation according to this same method until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid is harmful to the eye by great injury, suspend it with a needle, and copulate one part and not too much, so that no tears arise.
then distill colriere rouge into the eye, which is made of litharge.
Some people's eyes are born with a scar red, and it covers the pupil and is held on papers and turned to decay, seeming like a water-lily rose.
and the procedure is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, then closes their eyes, and you draw all that scar tissue with suitable needles to this place, and hold it in place with force.
then remove the first scar, and continue cutting down to the skin until the end, and be sure not to injure the eye in the procedure.
and the incision for the spot (or speck) should be made as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small force by which one removes the scab, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with brimstone or you may distill red cologne or similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a swab of egg white to keep it secure from an abscess.
and if nothing remains, and the stone surmounts it, and you fear an abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that alleviate a hot abscess.
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do with the arrows inserted in the eye by this method.
But always it must be that you moderate the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course. and of the accidental way, in the work with iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, they allow the work to be seen and weaken the eye all day.
Therefore, for the first thing you look to see if the eye, in which bel is situated, is out of place, and there is no other disease besides the bel; then adjust it in such a manner:
instruct the patient to place their head on your side, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be subtle and doubled according to this form:
And let them be two ounces by degrees in one body according to this form:
then, when one has to make those veins subtle and wipe the blood an hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye;
and keep from injuring the eye with the points of the speatmiles, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not harm only those veins.
and when you have done this, distill green and red bile into the eye to corrupt what remains of the scab.
And if you do not have the power to collect all of this in that hour, apply a plaster to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of the warm abscess, then resume according to this method which is before mentioned until it is healed.
and these are the forms of the forces:
They call such things "arissati" fistula:
When you cure it with cautery and medicine of burning water as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, indeed there will be in what you cut over the abscess, sore or place where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove all the instrument of which this is the form;
and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron sharp as a saw, and pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
And place on the head of the rotten bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is removed;
and do this once, then restore the head with medicinal desiccants.
if the joints are set and flesh begins to grow, and the core of the bone is set, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not swell again and is not at all abscessed, and no bad accident happens, know that it is healed.
if not, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the neck according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron and with cold medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take the saw according to this form, and let the iron head of the saw have three angles, and the blade be thin down to the teeth as you see here:
then place it on the bone beside the tear, and move your hand away from the eye slightly, then turn the saw entirely until it pierces the bone, and let the patient feel it through what comes from it if you keep your hand near your nose;
and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, the matter will go to your nose; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
When the eyes open completely, and there is no obstruction or diminishment, you must tie the patient.
then the healthy one, then apply suction cups or plaster without injuring to draw out the fluid, then place on the eye a salve made of acacia and aloes and incense and sarcocolla, and then apply bandages and cloths around it.
and the method of cloths is that you take soft cloths, and double each one into four layers, then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity the eyes need.
then draw it out from above with a hard bandage, and restart the cups to suck without piercing.
then remove the cups and let the eye remain held steady day and night, and if the ligaments soften, you must then draw it out much.
then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good.
if not; then apply the plaster and bandages and the ligature and cups until it is healed.
for the tearing of a vein When disruptions come in the retinal tissue, then open and come forth through the papers as if from resin grains, and is fearful to see.
then if you see it cover, the operations are such that you insert a needle from below the part up to that above, then insert another needle or have a double thread from the eye of the needle; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle in place according to the disposition;
then withdraw the thread and tie a part of the uve around it, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and place wetted wool from an egg yolk on the eye.
and leave it until the thread is tied around the uve, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound heals.
and sometimes the wound is compressed by the cloth at each part of a circular piece, until it heals.
And if the eyes appear swollen, puncture them with a fine needle that comes from the depth of the eye, and drain the moist, whitish fluid, and let them recover soon.
then extract it until it heals.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by water that gathers in the eye, resembling descending fluid, and it is not actual water.
and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on the prepared chair and upright, then hold the head with your hands from both sides, and move the jaw until you see the water rise to above your eyes. then it should be pierced, and not descended and let the light out, and show the patient the things as he is accustomed to;
and if it does not descend out, know that it is acute, and if the descensions of the bowe are not prepared as we have said.
seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a cut on the corneal membrane just along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, so that the bowe comes out;
and when it has come out, instill into the eye warm acrid liquid mixed with honey, or boiled acrid liquid and honey, then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
of the eye's waters We have experienced the appearances of fevers in the division, and what needs to be pierced; if during work according to health.
It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly.
then place the cloth soaked in oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right.
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right.
then place the tip of the instrument along the edge of the cornea by the thickness of a hair in that part beneath the minor lacrimal gland, then push the instrument, which is called "almagda," virtuously, and twist your hand until it pierces into the pulp of the eye, and feel that almagda enters the hollow part.
and the size of the almagda should be precisely that of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris. and this is the cornea of the eye.
if you see the bone through that membrane due to the clarity of the cornea, and can place the instrument there or where the pain is, then press it out along one path after another.
if the liquid flows out now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting a little, and if the fluid rises again by the second way, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and does not rise, extract slightly with a gentle turn of your hand little by little.
and then put a bit of the gemstone thread in water, and remove the eye from it. Then place something to plug the eye, such as a moistened piece of wool in rose oil and abundant egg, and secure it with healthy eye tissue.
Now, and those of our time, we place on with a cloth soaked in abundant egg.
And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which its form is as follows:
And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it a fine incision, then extract slightly with a gemstone, as we have said.
and for the completion of the work, arrange for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark place.
and be subject to all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his position until the third day;
then release him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
and it is not fitting that you do this during the hour of treatment or after incision now, but you must anesthetize him, because the fluid rises rapidly.
if abscesses appear, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and apply the treatment that alleviates the abscess.
and when it is pacified, release the eye and place on its face a cover to protect any day, and let it be in that dark house.
And then leave the house little by little, and adapt to its condition;
and know that no decoctions should be given in this case. And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda pears, which they applied with water, but altogether I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them will be deceived;
and may they be properly of arsenic: And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
Sometimes there arise or do not arise new sores of various kinds, some of which seem like scorpions' bites.
and if there are such sores and he has a sore with a deep color from a burn, and if the sore is filled with good color. In the case of these sores that are filled and not deepened, you must place the patient's sore part in your hands against the sun.
In the case of these sores that are filled and not deepened, you must place the patient's sore part in your hands against the sun. and open his nostrils, and cast the pinch of powder to those sores, and draw them out; put hold of that which you can sustain at the subtle sharp edge on one side, as long as you know that that sore is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that you cannot hold, open it with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains. and if without surmounting it, or abscess covered, apply the aid as it should.
and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the sores are removed, then apply or sprinkle ash or dry and sharp vinegar or wine. If the work is done and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is healed;
and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, to which the instruments cannot come to cut:
then you must insert a bit of thick linen thread, and tie it with our hands, leaving a little space between each knot. and place the patient's head under the thread so that it is comfortable, and pull gently until the thread comes out through the neck into the mouth.
and many times children do this at school, and it is a light matter for those who know how to do it.
then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and feel them one after another where we are or fit.
do this until you know that the nose has spoiled that part of the flesh, then pull the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back again as before.
do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh;
and then put a piece of linen over the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medications, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the head, to which one administers drops of oils and medicines or urine:
And it should be made of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a wick, and leads to;
and if you want to see, make a wick closed, and let the instrument be full for cleansing the head;
and have the handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
from the flesh on the nose
Many times, a disease called "telul" arises at the head from urine, grows and becomes large, so that it can be seen when examined.
and because of this, you must cool it at the beginning, and let the bone completely dry, then place a fire cautery or burning medicine over it;
and if you delay cooling it until it is large, then watch to see if it is hard, pale in color, and lacking sensation:
if it does not touch with iron at all, for this is an embedded abscess, for when it is cooled even once, great harm comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is due to a soot touchment, not pale in color, and you can completely cool it, then empty the patient and cool it with things drying and constricting.
When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilages in the work, it profits little, for in some men.
Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, see if the wound is fresh throughout its bleeding; and then adjust the two edges with suturing, and continue to treat until it is healed;
and if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary to cauterize all parts of their roots until they heal, then adjust the two edges with suturing, and bind them, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and powdered incense; and place over the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another healing plaster, and leave it until it scabs on its own, then treat with ointment until it heals.
The manner of suturing is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you before.
of abscesses of lips
In the lips, an abscess hardens, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips, incise along each fold, and take it with forceps and divide it into each part;
then apply the ligature after the incision with the vitreous stone, until the blood is stanched;
and then take the ileasis leaf, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
many times a carious tooth arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
then you must hold it with the tongs, and pull it to its root, and let the tooth or blood run out.
then apply vitriol powder, or other drying and收敛性粉末，于伤口上。
and if the tooth returns after incision, and this happens many times, then pull it a second time, and cauterize it: and if it does not return after the cauterization;
Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh. and sometimes the teeth become black, yellowish, and worm-eaten, as corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth smell foul.
and it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and his head in your lap, and inspect the teeth or scabs that are visible, until there remains nothing. and thus treat the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains until they are removed.
and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, restart from the second day and the third, until you have done it all;
and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to be treated, according to what the operation demonstrates, for the raspers used on exposed teeth have other shapes than those used between the teeth. and these forms and others be prepared for you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay the treatment as long as you can, for it should not be done immediately. because this is a very high substance such that one cannot have any excuse for not cutting it.
Then when the patient is constrained to extraction, it must be certain which tooth aches. Many times the pain afflicts the patient, and he believes it is from Saint Dent; and causes a good tooth to be pulled. and in any case, the pain does not cease from this until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already often done this to these saints.
and when you are certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary to cauterize around the tooth with a strong spatillum to protect the gum from all sides.
then pull it out with your tweezers or fine forceps at the first twitch and twitch, until it is well loosened, then firmly set the forceps. and let the patient's shoulder be on thy holy lap between thy knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After drawing the tooth rightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and insert it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
and if the wound is pierced and ragged, it must be filled with cloths, lint, or the like; and if you clamp it gently with forceps, do not break it in clamping;
and it must be deeply cut between the gum to extract the tooth.
And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part behind, as this will cause the patient greater pain than the first.
and take care that you do not do so as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the bone sometimes, and do not provide them with what we have recounted;
but they bring about sometimes through the incision of that great illness due to the roots remaining, or to the decay that they break, as we have often willed.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the area with wine or ale and salt;
and if the bleeding continues, which often happens, apply the area with ground vitriol;
and if that does not work, then cauterize.
The shapes of the instruments for extracting teeth should be with long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you are drawing the tooth.
and these are the forms: And let them have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and let them be made of well-forged iron, and let them have teeth to hold tightly.
from the roots of the teeth and when the root remains during drawing, it must be that you place wetted cloth in butter on the area for one or two days until the flesh is softened, then remove the pliers called "algefri" with which the head seems to be grasped like a cup.
and may also be made inside like a file and that is the form:
And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers, of which here is the form:
And it should be hollow and large so that it does not break, and if the root passes through it, that is good.
if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms are given hereafter:
And if you need to use an instrument that has two prongs, of which here is the form: and other instruments that are in front according to the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument that seems like large tongs, of which here is the form:
And let this instrument not be breakable, and know that most dental instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not described;
and the master arrows find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease show them, for there are diseases where the old ones did not teach any instruments because of the diversity of bones, or they rot, so they seek the appropriate instruments, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which the form is:
And let them be large and well-designed to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed.
and then restore the head of the bone with suitable medicine, and if there is corruption in the bone and it is small, remove it with this instrument:
When the tooth appears not at all according to its natural course, and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the tooth has grown after its place and is not in the right position, and cannot be corrected or smoothed.
then use the point. and if it is placed with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is described, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be made of sharp iron.
And file the teeth little by little in your hand for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that they can be smoothed, then smooth them with a piece of fine sandpaper as described.
and it is also like the file with which we make needles.
and file the tooth little by little with my hands gently, so that it does not move until it heals;
then the plain in the end for any razor, and if the edges are too sharp and it blackens the tongue, then file the harshness until it is equal, so that it does not blacken the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front teeth decay, or through impact or falling, and the patient cannot grasp what they eat without dropping it, and you have treated them with medicine that constricts, yet this is not effective;
then you must restrain them with a gold thread, for the silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
and let the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you wish to treat the teeth, take the thread and the needle double between two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the affected teeth, whether there is one or more, as long as you can clearly reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the bandaging until you reach the part where you started, and withdraw your hand gently and steadily, ensuring it does not move.
and tie your thread at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
then cut the heads of the thread with tweezers, and join them, and rethread them between the healthy tooth, and place them such that they do not choke the tongue.
and then let it remain so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the threads break, you must tighten it with another thread;
if it remains and serves so for its entire duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, as well as the two molar teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, you place it back in its place, frequently as we have said;
and let no one who is not wise and suffers do it in any case. And once, the form of a tooth of a bovine bone was made, and this tooth was placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it was tightened as we have said, and remained and served for a long time.
Sometimes this comes from the tongue or natural causes, that one is born thus. or by accident of a healed wound;
and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and place his head on your lap, and tie his tongue;
then cut the nerve ligament wide open, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and it is due to a sudden wound, then use a lancet and cut that ligament wide.
and be sure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery is beneath it.
and when you have done, lift the shoulder from the basin of rose water and almond, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent;
and let the patient apply it every night, so that the swelling cannot subside.
And if bleeding occurs, place quickened vitriol over the swelling. and if the bleeding continues, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this. and continue to treat until they are healed.
and if you see it is of a rusted color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a sore.
and if it is declining to blackworm, and there is moisture, he should give the ounce, and make a small hole with a lancet, and deliver from both sides; and if the wound turns against your work, he should place vitriol powder until it is effused, then return to your work as long as you drain all pus;
then lift the dressing of flax and silk, and treat other wounds until they are healed.
of the abscesses in the throat Sometimes blisters appear in the throat called "godath," and they are properly known as two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, take care:
if it is abscesses hard with small sensation and flesh colored, do not let them touch with iron at all.
And if they are red and the root is swollen, do not let them be touched with iron at all, nor for the discharge of blood; but let them be until they are dead, and then you shall cut them out, or they would break on their own;
and if they are white in color and the root is fine, prepare the instrument to cauterize, but first see if the abscess has cooled and is calm.
Then seat the patient in front of the sun, and their head be towards you, and let them close their mouth and have the servant hold their head between their hands, pressing the tongue underneath the entire instrument, which is its form;
and may it be of fine silver or tin as thin as knives:
And press the tongue with all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take an ounce and prick it like an almond, and draw out more than you can.
and draw out nothing from the threads with it, then cover the instrument, of which its form seems like force. and always the head is curved, and one against the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use tongs, of which the form is: And may it be sharp on one side, and on the other called;
and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after incising, gargle the patient with hot sharp water, or with hot and easy water, and if there is a flow of blood, gargle the patient with water, or with cooked pomegranate peelings, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is expelled. then continue the treatment until he is healed;
and if other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, then cut them in the same manner as the two almonds.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her throat, namely the small abscess.
and had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not expire due to the constricted passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained in such a condition for one or two days.
And the abscess was so large that it had to be lanced through both openings of the neck.
I hastened quickly, and pierced one inch, then pulled out the needle, and drew out a large portion of blood;
then pierced the other side at another hole in the nose, and opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
after piercing the inch into these abscesses, and drained a part of them, and only a little blood came out. and thus the passage of the throat was opened for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to lance this abscess for a long time.
and the abscesses repeatedly formed again, and filled the wound that I had emptied, until it became very large.
then I set it and cauterized inside the throat: then the swelling ceased to grow.
and I left those parts, and let God decide what would happen to them thereafter.
from the eye socket
When rheumatism affects the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are healed and are fine, then it is necessary that you lance them.
and that which is round gathered and is not long; and if it is bloody or of reddish color or black, then it is necessary that you incise it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it in the manner I have said, of its hardness and length, you should place the patient facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. then insert the oncine into the eye, and draw it out, and lance with the second instrument as I said in the incision of the almond.
And you must not apply force that is beyond the natural limit.
and if you apply more force, you may harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of cutting, you must use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate their fear.
And the manner of the cautery is very sharp. And let the patient place their head on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the fire cautery, using a sharp tool, so that it is not too thick nor too clear. and apply the edge of this instrument, whose form is as follows:
And let there be one hair or where one places the medicine, as with the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument above all the medicine on the eye;
and the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth over the medicine, without descending to the throat, and the cloth.
then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the eye, for half an hour, until you see it nerveless and the bites of the medicine are alleviated.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton in the tube above, until the cotton is saturated on the eye.
and do this often, until the cauterizations are perfect, then let it dry, and fall after four days or five.
And if you need to re-start the cauterization for the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization, wipe it around the wound with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
and let it be rinsed with cold water, and be washed with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization.
If it is washed with fumigation in this manner, take calamus, yarrow, origanum, rue, chamomile, and valerian, and gather all of these or any of them in one pot, and put asbestos in it, and boil it.
and the poultice should be well mixed with strong earth, and within the pot have the instrument cover according to this manner: And may be of silver or lead, and let one of the heads be placed in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed;
after the rekindling often, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not perform this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not perform this when the hot abscess is subsiding.
And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a chicken feather inside it, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot. because the fear of an egg does not allow vapor to weigh down the mouth, and this is a good treatment overall for health.
Many times it is applied to the throat, bone or spiny fish, or any other thing;
so you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
and what does not become clear and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance, if the thing is expelled by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and ties it to the sponge with a thread, and then swallows it; and when it comes to the place, it will expand, and then you will draw out the force.
and if it does not come to force as we have said, take the probing instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be inserted at the throat such that it can enter more easily into the throat, and keep the head lifted upwards. and be careful that you do not touch the epiglottis, for if you do, it may close and block the airway, nor should you push the bone in.
and when moved, it is fitting for the patient to stop using the instrument, because it has been moved or the thing is raw. if it has been drawn back, or he pulls it out forcefully with the entire instrument equally.
of the blood from the throat
Never is the sinew medicated, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not profit at all, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the pus, draw it out with a very small lancet, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if it does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow or shake the cane with hot air, and do this often. And if the patient is thirsty all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and let it go down, and move it often with his hand. and as soon as the blood feels cold, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with arsenic sulfide using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the uvea.
Do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are burning charcoal, and place the head of the patient covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and through those holes place the heads of the instrument;
then throw in the fumigating substance, and the patient put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but goes to the blood;
and the pus will now flow out, and if it does not flow, resume the fumigation multiple times.
and the patient feels thirst, eats salty and stale food, and does not drink water.
and then it is necessary for her to be forced out by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the pus is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved forceps meant to enter the throat. and it resembles a surgeon's claw, and it has a rough surface like that of a file, such that once it touches something, it cannot be released.
Many appearances of abscesses are, according to what memory brings after in this book, and they differ in puncture and incision;
and it is in two ways, of which one is in its own appearance and of what it holds, being moist.
And the second way is for the sores or where they are in the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the solid part, and abscesses of flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if for abscesses one should not pierce, until the boil is dead according to its completion;
and if for such cases one should pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are deep in joints.
For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them remain until they are rotten within, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
When the abscess is close to the main member, and if you delay the puncture until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member;
or it is close to the foundation, if you puncture it thus when it is ripe;
and it is not fitting that you puncture an abscess that is firm before digestion is completed, even if it is close to the foundation, so that it does not rot completely and becomes extended within, and may become a fistula; and cannot heal in a great while.
And you must know the time of puncturing the abscess when it is ripe according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the softening and ripening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
and you must place the perforation or more dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens and moves;
and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or at joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal where there is no pleura. In those that bend, according to that member.
And when abscesses are in the living flesh, it is better to let the perforation remain until digestion is completed, as we have said.
For if you perforate before it, the venom of the abscess will spread along the body, and be filled with much filth. and by chance harden the edges and the deeper parts of it.
And if to any abscess that is perforated according to the size of the body, as the limb requires.
and you must apply to small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
and if such large abscesses require making a hole in the heart, and applying; and when it has become as soft as wool, and is softened, then you must do so as one does for boils:
and if there are such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones that one applies salve to like the leaf of laurel, as for abscesses of the insane.
and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar applications.
Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess sore, it must be pierced completely.
And it must be done when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, if you pierce it, do not draw all the pus at once in that hour, but draw a part of it. then dress the abscess until the next day, then draw no more pus again. do this many times gradually, until all the pus has drained out.
the same is done if the patient has weak constitution, or is a woman pregnant, or small children, or old and infirm. Because the patient trembles several times with the discharge of the pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you will not know this.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a clean incision, apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then you must apply a tent in each so that they come together;
and if you have incised part of the skin over the abscess and closed it with a stitch, then you must fill it with old cotton or shreds of dry linen cloth, and bind it until the third day;
then the bone, and the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
And if there is an evacuation of blood in your work, you apply cold water and ease the pain, and cover with soft linen, and place over the area where the blood flows repeatedly.
And if the bleeding continues, apply a government and treatment, and the powders that I have said in my hand book, and if it is or tends to be cold, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, you must place wet cloths and woolen drapes soaked in wine and hot oil on them.
And if it is in summer, and the wound is fleshly, you must place wet cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, for three days, as we have said.
And then drain the abscess, clean it, and treat it as needed until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
Or I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
Or come from the head small abscesses, and they are like those in fabrics, as with the fibers of a flax plant, and there are many that resemble them.
There are fat ones and such, which have moisture as well as boils;
and there are such ones that are hard and stony to the knife, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause harm.
And the operations of the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "intromissory," from which the form follows, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, he lets it drain from above downward.
And when the moisture is evacuated, burn it without leaving any of the skin that contains that moisture, because it will reaccumulate if nothing is left.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present. if not, with water and thread, and dress the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let those who have been delayed overnight continue.
And then continue with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay overnight;
then dress the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds onto fat, then apply the compress according to this form, of long duration. and pourge your veins, and scorch it from all sides, and apply all your treatment to draw the poison where it lies.
and if the artery gives you contrary results, do as I said after.
And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and cut and treat as I have said.
And the cut for the stony abscess and its moisture is lighter, because they contain little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or head injuries there is no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I treated or head injury of an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard as a dull stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if any had been made of it, it would have also been as well injured as a stone.
In other abscesses coming or affecting the head, it must be that the opening remain always at the lowest part of the head, so as to allow the bowels to escape.
and treat the wounds as they should.
Many times such abscesses occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in angles, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body, they are hard, and are joined together with each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its groove, just as the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said. and the similarities of these scrofula are many.
and the similarities of these scrofula are many. There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
in which you see good placement upon touch, and resembles the color of the body, mute in each part and not inverted near the neck nor near the artery nor the vein, and is not deep.
then you should cut it open from above, and scorch each part, and place the two lips of the wound with the stitches, if you have need to do so, just as we have said for abscesses of the head.
and draw a little bit by little bit, and be sure that you do not hit the nerve nor the vein, and neither the spatumileagus nor the trenchers, that your hand does not escape, and do not go too far, so as not to hit what you should not.
And if you hit the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to continue, apply vitriol powder or any other powders that staunch blood, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is relieved, and the wound softens and begins to rot.
And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it;
then you should examine if there are any small scrofulous swellings left, and cut them out and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not advisable to cut that swelling at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off without harm.
then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and proceed to the treatment.
And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and draw out the force, and suture it as we have said.
it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and draw out the force, and suture it as we have said. Those scrofulous swellings due to excess, puncture them where they appear to drain.
and puncture them in the same way as previously mentioned, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, then apply the ointment cure until it is healed.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those with scrophula, it is necessary to incise the slit in the throat which is called "epiglote"; and do not seek help from them, for their veins and the nearby parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
When the disease is in the channel of the tonsil, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
It must therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglote, be cut over three or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the size of the cut through the skin, and not in the cartilage;
and if the veins are suitable for cutting the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in that area.
And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the entire length of the throat to the tip, then cut the skin until it reaches the muscle. and cut the blood vessels if you see any, then sew up the skin as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein from the elbow which jumps out because the bone is broken, and by the loss of voice due to fault.
and leave the wound open for a day.
And when the hour has passed since there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and stitch it well without the cartilage;
then administer medicines that produce flesh, until he is healed.
Albucasis said that this should not be done until the throat is completely numb, and the patient is judged to be dying, and then proceed. Then treat the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are guarded from death.
and because of this, the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took the knife, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the veins there.
and I was called to treat her, and found her already dead.
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it. I knew that she had not pierced a vein nor any great artery, but the blood was coming from the wound.
I hastened there, dressed the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
and there was no change in the lady's voice, and she returned to her usual state;
for I say that in the operation of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a liver, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two methods: nature, and accident;
or naturally there is no mechanism.
And the accident is according to two methods, of which one resembles a fatty lump, and the other method resembles an abscess that comes from within the artery. and if there is fear, it should not be operated on except in what is small, and the proof and search are made of all that interferes: if you find it as we find fat, and cannot be drawn to any vein, pinch it, as one pinches fat, and draw it with its skin, if there is any. and search well around it, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is completely healed.
Many methods for dealing with fats exist, of which I will describe all the similarities.
and now it is necessary for me to say all the difference that exists between fat and dislocation.
I say that heat and fever arise until the boiling is passed and the putrefaction is completed. Then the fever and heat subside.
With the new one having no heat, fever, or pain, and containing pus, which is its own secretion and according to the color of the body, and begins like a jelly, and becomes large.
and they vary according to their appearance, or grease, or moisture, and not much in color as I said in the division.
It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermissive," according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
And the method of inquiring into abscesses for us is that you prick more moist parts of the lump you find in the abscess, and turn your needle little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core. Then it must be according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the interposer, and take care that it not jump.
If the moisture flows out, regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the interposer no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then incise it in a cross shape, and remove it with forceps, and gently cauterize each part. Take care where it lies and treat the surrounding tissue with hot oil to ensure it heals properly.
and if you cannot treat it properly, remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will cause us trouble many times.
and if one remains a little, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with certain corrosive powders moistened, hold the wound, and apply hot abscess-sothing things until it is healed;
and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what nourishes flesh.
and if the pulsing vein is contrary or another that requires haste, apply the juice of ground vitriol, and let it remain for two or three days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper that has remained from new.
See here the forms of the intervening instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small;
and there are three square ones which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews ligatures, and they are made of yellow brass or iron or silver, and it is said that those that are yellow are more effective for surrounding the cords of fistula;
and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
The shapes of the oncin are like wool in resemblance, as you see here:
and if oncin have two corbeures of three ways also;
and if oncin have three corbeures, and are also of three ways;
and if oncin have two corbeures, and oncin with only one corbeure, and are of three ways;
and all this is necessary in their place.
The head of these for which one makes them is sharp, and among such one cuts with force only from one side, by which one sears the nostrils, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
and of these inserters are the wicks placed in the thumbs, so that the patient does not perceive them during the incision of abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and one uses force only in flabby areas, such as legs, arms, mammary glands, and angles, and in similar places.
and sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling the shells of nuts, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding: and it is placed once in its place where it heals by degrees from the veins, and in the arteries, and once more according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, to the point where they resemble women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen. Whoever needs to treat them should do so according to this form from line .b. to .g.: then burn the fat, and fill the wound with flesh-inducing medicine. Then suture the two edges of the wound together and treat it until it heals.
and if the breast sags down and becomes soft due to its size, as happens in women, cut it open at two ribs above, using similar incisions. of which one should be held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contain the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until he is cured;
and if he is not cured, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to the bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a腐蚀性药膏; and leave it until the patient drinks the remedy and the fat are removed, then treat the wound until he is cured.
These abscesses that come from arrow wounds are similar to hard scrofula glands, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.: And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula glands, incise it as we have said for incisions in scrofula, and if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above is sewn up, there often arise abscesses; likewise, it happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, let the abscesses remain long to form. and when you feel it with your hands, feel the constriction;
and when it is due to the vein, let it be relieved by evident swelling;
and it is folly to treat this abscess, especially when it is near the armpits and angles and under the arm and many other parts, and it is very large. Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure, and he who is in pain should also avoid it, and in that which is swollen from an artery, cut through the skin above the long hair;
then cut the incision at the inch marks, and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed.
then insert a needle and pierce it until the other side, and hold the artery with a doubled thread at two ends, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then pull the intervening limb between the two threads until the fluid comes out, and then release the abscess.
then administer the treatment that follows, until the ligaments heal; then treat it with ointment appropriate for this, until it is healed;
and if the abscess is as large as the vein, it must be that you draw out as much of the abscess as you can from the entire area, then insert the needle under the skin you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and use a double thread, so that you pull from the other side. then bind the abscess as I have told you, or with a ligament from one part to the shoulder.
and if you doubt that the thread is strong enough, then insert another needle through the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four knots.
then incise the abscess until the excess flows out, then incise the kidney and leave what is tied.
then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then give him treatments and applications until he is cured.
As abscesses come to the artery and vein, abscesses of the nerves when they are injured, or through too great labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in joints and bones, and in all places where there are joints, and it is the cause of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions with pain;
and when one extracts it forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely due to the body, but beneath the heart;
and must move well from all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance it might contract; and that which is on the head or forehead, open the skin with a spatula.
and that which is on the head or forehead, open the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, take it with forceps, and treat it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with a needle, and cauterize it, then extract it and suture the wound, and continue to treat until it heals.
Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called "fungus" by its similarity to mushrooms, and the head is small, and the shoulder large;
and there are both small and very large;
and I saw a home which had two or more bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were slightly split, and within corroded thus with moisture.
I cut them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces. The work in incision is such that you should examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and has fine roots; if you cut them with the spoon broad, and let the cautery on fire be in your presence.
if you cut them with the spoon broad, and let the cautery on fire be in your presence. For in the tailor often comes too great hemorrhages, and if he dies, then you must hasten to cauterize;
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-madeawl thread, and place it on the artery as we have said, and let it hang for two days;
and then secure it, and do not cease to hold the awl thread until it grasps the artery, and continue to monitor the work;
and if the roots are large, do not fear to grasp them immediately for the abdomen, but you may well grasp half of them, then cauterize so that they do not return;
then treat the wound, and ensure you do not touch the nipple which is of fleeing color and of poor sensation and has regard.
For this is an abscess embedded, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
when the boil is hot If the appearance of the bubo comes from a fire cautery or a cut by a needle, and is on the abdomen and there are some in the groins, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as was mentioned before, or from wind.
and if it is from the rupture of the bowel and the discharge of the bubo, then its color resembles that of an abscess, similar to the body's color, and it is a slight thing with little pain, and shows various discharges. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied. When pressed at its roots, it rises and then returns. Sometimes it swells significantly upon entering the bath and due to great strain.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and clearly shows when you press it with your hand; it does not constrain much.
and if it is for blood, open by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and puncture according to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is sore to the touch, and the work is that you look whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
and if it is for windiness, it is sore to the touch, and the work is that you look whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness. You must let the treatment continue. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, you must instruct the patient to stretch his abdomen, and be extended entirely straight, then draw the belt around the entire waist; then command him to lie very still in your hands, then go around the limb where you have drawn the belt completely around the entire circumference, then place half of the abscess above at the level of the great inch; then bind it tightly with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let it be tied firmly in place.
then work the midpoint of the abscess extended over the thread, and place your index finger inside, and hold the intestine steady. if you find it caught on the thread, release it, and place the intestine at the rear of the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, take it with forceps, and drain the excess.
and if the artery makes it difficult, or the vein, go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through, and place the needles where you made the puncture.
then extract the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it rots, and cut out the dead flesh. or you let it come when it is subtle and rotten, then treat the wound as needed, and cut out the abscess as we have said.
or you let it come when it is subtle and rotten, then treat the wound as needed, and cut out the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and close the wound with sutures.
of the sore We have spoken of the symptoms of chancre and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid treating it with iron.
and we say that the chancre occurs in the groin, and great caution is needed in its treatment. The ancients said that when a chancre can be scraped away, like one found on the sameles or in the thigh, and similar areas, it should be entirely removed when it is in the early stages.
no one has ever cured any of them before me.
And the procedures, when it is set or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile;
then make him healthy if he has evident fullness, then prepare the patient well set so that the work can be done.
then throw out the warts or scabs, and the hair from all parts, and remove it from all parts leaving nothing behind.
and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with some object, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched. then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of dropsy We have already described the symptoms of dropsy, and how the gathering of the fluid is made, and the signs for each symptom, and the treatment with medicines, and that which is treated with a iron.
and one should not apply iron in these two symptoms: this is to know, otitis and hyperpyrexia, because it is a deadly thing;
therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not help, then see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as an attack of wind or similar things; if you do not apply iron, because there is doubt;
and if you see the patient is of strong vitality, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and he is neither too weak nor too old, then proceed in this manner to treat: lay the patient on his side on your hands, and the attendants press the abdomen by directing water to the lowest part of the sore, then take the thorn spatillum according to this form: And let it be cut from two parts. With a point, and in any case should not be inserted so deep that it could come as far as the intestines when one drives it in, and he cannot bend it;
then see if the hydrocele is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you incise upwards from the groove III down along the blade of the knife; and if the hydrocele is due to the disease of the liver, let your incision be on the left side of the groove III down.
and if it is due to the spleen, let it be on the right side, and it is not appropriate that the patient lies on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak side.
pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut out, and lift your hand from all the spatumile between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue as in cauterizing to the quantity of a nail or about that.
pierce the subcutaneous tissue until the spatumile comes to its proper place, and this is the seat of the fluid, then draw out, and remove this instrument whose form it has. And it is similar to a thin silver needle, made of fine or light metal, and has on the part below the small puncture. and on one side, three punctures; and two on the other part, and one on the other;
and the head of the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that writers cut the quill:
above the head is the alemele, so that when the instruments come to the edge, they now lie above the instrument;
draw out then the half or the third part, for if you draw out more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he may fall senseless, or he comes near to death;
but draw out according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse;
then draw the instrument and hold the fluid, and it is now held to prevent the perforation which is on the syphax, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner.
then repeat the procedure on the other side, if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small quantity of fluid.
do this every day, and be careful not to follow it too much so as to leave any significant amount of fluid.
And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much fluid, let the wound of the sepulture or sand warm up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and let him drink. and the application of medicinal remedies until he is cured, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
No child is born who does not have pores in the urethra, or where the pores are small, or are not in their proper place.
If it suits him to do so quickly before he passes much very subtle mucus according to this form:
then insert or perforate the thin cloth of linen, and secure it in place for three days or four. When he begins to urinate, remove the cloth, allow urination, and then replace it.
and by chance it may not be necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not allow it to remain closed.
If the wound from which the lead is pierced is small, it should be medicated with a lead clove, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the perforation in their place will be unable to urinate, for none are born with the perforation at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards. and they cannot heal because the matter cannot come to the surface, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on their back, then the head of the vein and the cord are also made as thick as a pen, so that the punctures are each in the middle, as it should be.
and beware of the bleeding that comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules of the verge Many times comes this abscess in the vein, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh.
and among them there are harmful and non-harmful;
and it is necessary that you pierce them with a sharp needle, and cut and clean them all, then place on cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment; then apply the ointment diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and emitting pus, then you must apply a cauterization to it.
When you have cut it, and if the boil is such that it has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the boil that is inside first. and when it is healed, treat the part outside.
For when you treat it all together, the head of the boil may not be secured properly, leading to infection and corruption in the boil and around it.
If it is necessary to shave all that is black and corrupted, then tie over the plaster of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranate peels and tares, and cure with other plasters until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery aids in both dispositions together: it is to say, for the bleeding and the corruption;
and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a probe into the head of the penis, and let the patient urinate with it inside.
and when the hair is shaved from the head of the penis which affects those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scrape the head of the penis with a hooked instrument until the threads are loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides.
and if this is a matter to be discussed, you should cauterize it with a spatule for a short while on the head of the penis and the skin.
then separate the parts between two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water over it, so that it does not dry again.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity as are other wounds; whenever we perform this work of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most gentle for their welfare.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have it only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions with forceps, and on an infant, and with a new knife.
if the cords slip because there are two layers, and by chance one of them is cut and the other remains below. Or if it retracts the cord, and the pain is doubled, and in the healing where it is from the arm, the extremity of the limb is not assured.
and in the healing of the nail, by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs amok, and often they grow thus without needing healing, and I have seen this.
From the dressing which is done with force on all the thread of hair I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, cut it equally in one whole thickness; but that the threads be well thin between the skin;
and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it hears, that you only make him wet the thread between the shaft and then dry it in all ways that you can.
and you make it stretch completely straight, and arrange the forces in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
and place your hand on the shaft and blow or kiss it, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is tight. and clean it well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the upper part with a double thread, and tie it by one link to another.
and clean it well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the upper part with a double thread, and tie it by one link to another. and hold it at two points by the second hour at the pocket and the right index, and place between the two joints, then lift the key above quickly and draw the head of the penis; then let the blood drip slowly and slowly, for it is painful. and apply powder on top and on top of the powder place a cloth glued with one half of a boiled egg soaked in rose water, preserved with good fresh rose oil. Leave it on until the next day, and continue to treat until it is healed.
The form of the forces in generation is this:
let the shoulders be held and be sharp, and let the shoulder bones also be as large as the hand equally:
the error of the mundification is when the bowels within are incised;
then you must extend it to your nail, as the leeches do for an abscess;
and apply it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with forceps, and then apply it.
And if they last for three days, and that which is below the scrotum is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are pacified, and then gently scorch it.
and apply it as you can move it, and be careful not to burn the part of the scrotum, for it will not harm anything.
Cure then the limb of sudden wounds from powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if one copes too much of the heart, it goes above, and will not harm.
Cure then, as we have said, so that it be healed.
retain the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to stone passage, or frozen blood, or a bow, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it must be treated by raising his knees. and let the feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained for the passage of the stone above, so that the urine is relieved;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringue," of which its form is described here:
and it should be made of fine silver, light and feather-like, like the feathers of an eyelash; and let its length be one and a half palm lengths, and let it be fine at the tip.
And the manner of expelling urine is that you take a double thread, tie at the end a little wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe;
and remove the excess of wool and insert it just to the end of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on the chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then lift the penis upward toward the opening.
then insert the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient's urine come from the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because the way it goes is twisted.
then the threads are tied little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then it is extracted and the urine flows;
and continue the suction until the bladder is emptied, and loosen the patient's bowels.
When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medicines, then make all the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
It is closed, and if at three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
and the flax is cut so that the medicines are thick enough to anesthetize well, and if we can remove the moisture and apply when needed.
and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, place the cuspidor in the moisture, and apply what is needed.
if you draw out the moisture from there, and then set it firmly. if the moisture enters there and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which we enema the bladder:
And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher;
and over the heart or the hanging ligaments;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you will enema the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts forming a single double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire;
pour le chef du clivert en la verge, puis tienne ta main sur la vessie pour toute la moiteur amenante, tant que le malaide sente que celle moiteur est justement venue à la vessie;
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle and pierce it roundly through; then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a joint, and place within it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder;
of the stone
We have already described in the division the methods of stone, and their extraction together with medicines;
and we have described the difference between a stone incarcerated by rain, and all the signs, and which stone one should open and treat. and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is incarcerated in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the urine has become acidic due to its subtlety.
and it passes through the bladder, and greatly afflicts the patient's penis, and it pains him many times, and then diminishes. and from these jumps the foundations;
and healing is light for children until they are four years old, and very difficult in the elderly, and is moderate for those in between.
and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it must first cleanse the patient with a clyster to remove all the filth from the intestines. For it obstructs at times when seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift and move them into a sitting position, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and passes out through the urethra.
then make the patient sit between your hands, and their hands be below their thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward.
then he should probe and touch within;
if you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to incise into the stone.
And if it does not yield to touching with the index finger of your left hand, soften your middle finger if the patient is pregnant, or your ring finger if the patient is young and fully developed. and place the stone in its foundation, probe the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, apply pressure at the neck of the bladder.
then press with your finger, and place the stone at the site where you wish to incise.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch the fingers of his right hand upwards, and remove the skin which is beneath the fingers in the part where the incision is made.
then he pours the spatumile copant, which is in the form: And he makes the incision between what is between the fingers and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh.
and let it be straight on the stone, and his two hands be close to the fundament, and make the incision through so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
by chance the press so the dought which is or foundation, she jumps forth without work;
and know that there is bone where it has angles and margins: it is cracked to issue;
and if it has a part that is below, resembling a groove, and round, of which the issue is light.
for those where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not jump, then you must hold it with tongs that are also like a file at the head, to move and extract the bone so that it does not escape. or you pour out from beneath the curved subtle instrument at the head;
and if you cannot arrange it thus, widen the little hole a bit, and if the wound is without pus, cleanse it with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, pour out the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then incise above, then draw it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes down there where the loins cannot close it up;
but in any case strive to treat, or to dilate with forceps, until you treat it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. then place the patient's head on their neck, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
And when you dislocate it, raise the head of the bone very well with oil and water, then treat with an ointment of defluxicon and basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses or corruptions and clots of blood in the bladder occur in the wound, and are thereby retained by the urine, which is known to be in such a manner that it does not flow with the urine: then thrust your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder and cause corruption.
then cleanse the wound of water and oil and salt, and assist the patient in all ways that you see, until he is healed;
and it is necessary that for all the wounds you treat, you bind his two thighs and apply the medicines to the limb.
And if the stone is small, and it is pierced from the genital area, and urine cannot pass; if the treatment of that which I have said so far involves cutting him many times, you are excused from this cutting due to this treatment. I have already proven this in such a manner.
Take I iron fork according to this form and fix it in the fire with three angles.
then take a thread and tie it around the genital area below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder.
then push the probe gently into the vein until it reaches the stone; and turn the probe in your hand at the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on that which is stuck from the stone that is within the vein. if it is broken soon, and jumps out with the urine, then the patient is cured.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, so tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then place the vein against the stone between the two ties, and extract the stone, untie one of the threads, and clean the congealed blood from the wound. and let the treatment continue until he is healed.
from the stone of women
And often there is a need to remove a stone from women, and if it happens even once, the treatment is serious, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
it is one that the woman may be a virgin;
and the second is that it is impossible to find a woman skilled enough who will reveal herself to the mirrors, especially if she is chaste.
and the third way is that it may happen that no skilled woman can be found for this art with her hands;
and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman may be more embedded than the stone in the man, which is why a deeper incision is necessary and there is great fear involved. And if such necessity arises for this, you must find a skilled midwife, and at points like these, one must use subtle chaste mirrors.
and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command about the investigation of the stone; and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin:
and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin: then she must seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she must hold to her duty, and advises her to perform her duty or examination on the patient, and place and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then incise on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, and let it be such that the stone appears in that part; and do not move his hand over the stone or under it, and cut it at first with small incisions;
and do not move his hand over the stone or under it, and cut it at first with small incisions; then apply the reed to the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can exit with force, and know that many kinds of stones exist.
this is to know, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with points.
if you know the signs to know the outcome.
And if the stone fails to come out, put vinegar in it and hold it for an hour until the stone is dissolved.
then return to your work, until the stone is removed, and have with you the tools I told you about in the extraction of the stone from those who assist you in your work;
and if it flows out, and it is from the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the wound and the bandage of linen and wool, and do not re-open this, and leave the stone untreated, lest by chance the patient die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is relieved, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
Aqua vitae is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white spirits, which come from the heart of the juniper, that contains the essence.
and it is called "syphac", and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg. and it is the skin of the yolk between the white syphac that we have said;
and this happens not often. And the generation of this rheum is due to weakness that comes to the embryos, and this material is spread.
And sometimes it comes from striking the shoulders, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish color similar to jaundice, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, because if it is white syphac as we have said, it is an abscess, and its size is long like that of an egg, but it does not strike the shoulders, for it has moisture throughout.
And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, the abscesses are incised with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought that it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white yolk, one feels it well;
Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you must probe with the entire intervening square, as its form is described above. According to what comes after the intervening square, judge of what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to our power and the condition of their body;
then place the sponge on their back, above something a bit high, and put dust of cloth over him;
sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the patient's heart.
then take the leit spatium and cut the skin of the patient's heart lengthwise from above the knife until below the ribs, and make the incision entirely straight by dividing the skin of the patient's heart down to the white line, and gently cauterize it according to your ability.
then puncture the white line fully with an awl, and抽取出所有液体，然后插入你的指甲，将白线上方的皮肤撑开。
and do not touch the patient's heart, but only the white line. cut out the whole or in pieces by itself the substance of it thoroughly, for if you do not cut it properly, the pus will return.
and if the egg jumps during your work, you must reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the surface.
then join the two flaps of the heart incision with one suture, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensive, fearing the hemorrhage.
then cut the heart entirely from the suspensive vessels, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if an ailment is collected in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you treat the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put on the wound moistened wool in rose oil;
if you treat the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put on the wound moistened wool in rose oil; and put on another layer of moistened wool in wine and oil, and place over the two joints, and put on top doubled cloth bandages, and bind it all with the ligature according to this form:
then take two cloth bandages, and fold them in the shape of strips of wool according to this likeness, and assemble them by stitching at the waistband of the trousers, one head of the shoulder above the fundament down to the back, and the other at the part of the arm.
and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the restriction gather in the loop of the arm.
and sometimes this branch of the fire cautery is medicated instead of iron branding, and you should use a sharp cautery blade, peel off the skin from the scales, and heat it as we have said, so that the white syface containing the water is exposed.
and take the cautery in this form, and prick that syface with the pins, and brand it with this sharp hot cautery.
And dip the cautery in all ways that you can, until you moisten it thoroughly.
and make sure that the fire does not touch the eye.
and know that this work is more valuable; and during the stopping of bleeding, and instructing that the operations of cutting be performed;
and if anything else prevents you, or an abscess, or bleeding, or other things, then treat what prevents you according to what was previously said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this operation because of its horror, then perform perforation as I have instructed. And when you are certain by the signs that we have said indicate a watery abscess, then make the patient sit on the raised seat; pierced the abscess at the part opposite to the entire spinal column, and make the perforation along the length of the body;
and let the wounds be wide so that all the blood may flow freely;
then place cotton on the vein, and bind it, and let the remaining blood flow out, then treat the wound until it is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the blood to flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument used to treat blood in hydroptic conditions, as its form is described earlier.
and widen the wound, and know that the blood will return, and gather after six months or so. And when it has gathered as described before, then the patient's days will pass without issue.
Know that in this branch of the section there is much to fear in various positions, which is why it seems to me that one should beware.
and I will tell you the procedure and similar characteristics of the abscess.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from flesh, and especially from wounds; and it is by chance.
This means that it comes from bitter and acrid superfluity, which is spread in wounds, or by percussion.
and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the flesh. and if he does not find any pain, and there is an abscess;
and by chance it is an abscess with green and yellowish color, and sometimes comes from a vein, or swell due to a vein.
When it is from a vein, it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess; when you press it with your fingers. and it is not fitting that you touch it.
The one that is caused by swelling of the vein is known by its arrangement in the expression when touched with your fingers, and can well be incised based on this appearance, and on other symptoms. and it is that you take the heart of the joints, then place the egg on top, and stretch the white evenly, and release the suspender from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these cords, then you must stretch the egg, and take it out;
and if it is air in the white, or within the vessels, then you must release all that tension, and take it out completely.
And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut out completely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bourjoon, with the joints being softened, and the patient suddenly experiences great pain when it moves.
and the treatment for this disease is well prepared like the one mentioned before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It must be that you seat the patient on an elevated chair, then put the suspensory ligament of the testicles above your two thighs, at all the vessels near the penis, and carefully stretch them forth.
then incise the sharp-bladed spatula wide across the vessels, until they are exposed, and then brand from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come out, and tie it again at the other end. then incise them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt fluids.
then treat the wound as with others or with honey, so that no vein becomes inflamed that nourishes either of the joints;
for if this happens, there is no harm, and since all the veins become inflamed, it must be treated in all the veins; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to incising the veins, and dry up and cannot be helped.
The occurrences of this branch are due to the section that comes from syphilis, or extension on the abdomen in the region of the inguinal area, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the joints;
and this rupture is either from syphilis, or from the extension of it, and come from these two types of cause:
or by percussion, or by jumping, or by lifting a heavy burden, or by similar things;
and the signs when it is due to the extension of the syphilis, are that they occur little by little, over a long period of time, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the fundament, because syphilis presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the ileum, that it causes a sudden onset of pain, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin, for the discharge of the intestine and the body below the ileum.
And sometimes the cicatrices with the intestine are retained inquisitively, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these treatments with iron causing fear, for which it is advisable to avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to warm the intestines with his hand from within through the wound, if it can enter. then bind it around his neck. Between your hands, lift the thighs.
then the heart is above, and scrape all the skin from the roots long; then insert into the flaps of the side inches as you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the intestines may freely protrude.
then cauterize the buttock beneath the skin, until the white fat is completely exposed from all sides.
then insert your index finger where the buttock follows, between the white fat beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the egg and between the second layer of fat.
and then move your right hand inside the buttock, and place the white fat on top with your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the fat towards the side. and instruct the minister to extend the egg upward, and untie those that are behind the ligament;
and if there is any part of the intestine exposed or white fat, and if you find any such thing, put it back into the abdomen;
then take a needle with a thick thread made of several strands, and sew it in the rear part of the fat, which is after the skin of the hips; after suturing, then clip the head of the shoulder that appears with threads, until there are only four threads remaining; then arrange them one over the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is below the skin of the hips, with a strong bandage of two parts; then envelop the head of the shoulder with cloth, and bind it tightly in two places, so that no fluid that nourishes it can enter into it, and an abscess does not arise; and again put the bandage according to the first long bandage around it, and after these two bandages leave a space under the heart of the shoulder blade as large as one hand; and afterwards the rest according to the roundness that the egg carried;
then place in the part that is under the skin of the shoulder blade, as much as the wound requires, and the bow, as we have said above;
then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and put the bandage as we have said. And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent bleeding after incision due to doubt. For this often happens, and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself;
and if it delays in falling off, then dissolve it with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off.
then treat the wound with other dressings until it is perfectly healed.
of fatty hernia
In this case, I have never known anyone to dare treat it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the branches intertwined around a vine, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly during dislocation.
then take some of it, and treat the abscess of those who work until the vessels clot.
and the treatment as we have said, until he is healed.
No occasion comes of rupture in veins, as we have said, and open the eyes;
and feel no parts of the intestines at the incisions, and if any are felt, it is little, and change all hours.
and in any case, if it remains too long in this spot, the wound or syphilis will develop, as parts of the intestines are felt.
and this happens due to the extension of syphilis which is in the veins, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells the eyes and opens.
and the treatment involves fire cautery, as we have already said before;
and sometimes it is treated with a iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies sovin on his back between your hands, then cover the part of the rupture swollen in width according to the size of three doix.
and then extract the syface that is under the skin where it protrudes, then take the rag and place it over the apparent part of the syface.
and press it well on the abdomen, then suture the two apparent parts of the syface over the rag, and suture them both.
then extract the head of the wart, and do not cut or extend the egg nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the branch of the intestines; then treat it as you would treat wounds.
then treat it as you would treat wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The seam is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauteries are healed in this place, and closer to safety.
of the softening of the skin of the cheeks
Many times the soles of the feet become softened in some people because the flesh within is softened, and it must be seen.
and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to make the patient lie on their back, and cut away the softened skin above the natural skin.
then join the two edges with a缝合线，如果你愿意，可以将多余的软化皮肤用三针或四针牢固地缝合。请注意，这里的"costure"在古法语中意为缝合线或缝合针。
then stitch between the seams, and treat the wound like other wounds until it heals, and change the bandage.
by just punishment
Castrations are forbidden in our law, and because of this, I shall not speak of them in this book;
and it is necessary to use force only for two manners:
of which one is that the eyes should be able to answer when asked and know how to treat the wound;
and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, and dogs, and other animals.
I therefore say that castration is performed in two ways: or by attraction, or by splitting.
In the one we perform by attraction, place the animal in hot water until the cords are softened and remain; then take them with your hand, until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
On castration of the tail: It is necessary to hold the animal, and press the skin of the cords with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each testicle cleanly when you have well scalded them.
and he lets any little pus and thin pus which is under the vessels remain.
and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, for in attraction, by chance, some of the testicles remain, causing the beast to desire lust.
then treat the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites.
Herms and Hermaphrodites are according to two methods in men: one is that between the two testicles, it is open as if it were the shape of a woman's figure, or it has hair, and sometimes in the course of urination.
And the other method is for women, placed above the knife as a rod and two coins.
And the treatment for men and women is that you clean all the wounds thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds.
in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, it has no treatment.
Tentingene is an adjointed char on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentingene with your hand or fingers, and apply it lightly.
and do not use too strong a fomentation, lest blood flow occur, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
and for another char that arises at the opening of the arm, apply it, and sometimes jump out forcefully, and resembles a cow, and because of this they called it in ancient times "cow disease. If you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tumor and its treatment until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the wound is small; and is natured at birth, or accident by disease that has come.
and is natured at birth, or accident by disease that has come. or it is by sharp injury, or through a fine or thick thread, and is made in the flesh, or in the sides, or beneath, or that be.
and defend conception, childbirth, and by accident the flowers to have.
and the knowledge of this is through the gaze of the midwife.
If the swellings are near and apparent, seek with your fingers or touch them.
If it is through a fine thread, and it is near the two lips, hasten, and remove it thus.
Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spreading her legs;
then spread the two lips until the underlying flesh is round and over the stoppers;
then take wool, and fat in oil, and place it over the wound, and let the woman lie on her back each day so that it does not heal too quickly.
And if the syphilis is hard and thick, it is necessary to scrape with a spatula resembling a bay leaf.
If the stoppers are of born flesh, suspend them at the inch and the gill;
and use the blood-stanching medicines, such as ice, dragon's blood, incense, and abundant egg white;
then administer a broad pledget of wick, so that the wound cannot heal;
and thus be long, and administer a tent of dry linen;
then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
And when a carbuncle brings forth pus, it should be treated according to this method, unless it is an encrusted abscess. For an encrusted abscess in the carbuncle, one should not touch it to incise.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without cause commonly occur, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tumors.
and we have already described the symptoms of aus, and the signs, and I will now say those that can be cured.
I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones, when they are fully ripe in the carbuncle, do not appear by touch; except those cured with iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the sore, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then warm the altar with tongs, and put the copa in its roots, then sprinkle with medicines that constrict blood, such as açaí, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things.
then let his feet rest against the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water;
and if the bleeding continues, have him sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate peels and galls and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to his back.
And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury;
then take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess has come to a head, treat the place with ointment until it heals.
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it should be treated as I have said for the thumb. and continue the treatment until he is healed.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the arm, such as chancre, porous abscess, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that comes from the arsis, which is not one of the abscesses that boil over.
and if you wish to know the iron work, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it; let it continue to mature until the pain is alleviated.
and then place the patient on a seat, and have two small seats where he can recline, and support him on his back and align his feet with the lower part of the leg;
and spread his thighs apart, and place his arms over his knees, and bind them well with a firm band.
then apply the cautery to the right side, and bring the instrument used for opening the mouth of the blister hereafter described.
and you must ensure that when you see the instrument administered to this blister, you insert the first needle to know the depth of the blister, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient. and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with strips of cloth, so that the instruments do not cause pain.
and it is necessary that he place the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
And when the abscess is open, and it is made soft by hand, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth, or a sponge soaked in liquid.
and when the boil is evacuated, it is necessary that you place wet cloths in oil of rosemary, or in oil of turpentine.
and place the cloth over the depth of the wound, and put above the wound and on the blade clean wet cloths in water or cooked oil.
then apply the treatment after two days of ointment application until it is healed;
and occasionally lift the wound and the sore with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and wormwood that have been cooked. then resume the ointment application.
And if the wound is placed on the margin, you must take care to avoid cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the natural birth figures, and the signs are when you see the woman press her abdomen, and desire to smell the air:
then hasten for the child to be born quickly. then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and the child comes out with its head, and the next one follows with it.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his abdomen, so that the child comes out quickly;
for when it descends on its head, she follows with him, and the mature ones are cleansed of their superfluities by good cleansing;
and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
for he comes sometimes on his feet, and comes forth into the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where he comes on the abdomen, or side, and is turned by accident over the neck, and in other evil shapes.
it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how one should assist her.
If a child comes to his head through natural birth, and the mother gives birth easily, and the virtue of her is weak, then I make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her.
and arise her nature of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then pour the bile between her two small spatulas as their form is. and cut the second one, and scrape with her nail until the moisture that is contained comes out;
and press the abdomen of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cleanse the woman with fenugreek seed oil and olive oil.
and then make her breathe deeply and expel air forcefully, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. if now treat the child.
And if the two hands swell, you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, you place the woman on the seat and lift her feet up high; then place the seat on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not move during the procedure;
and if the hand cannot enter and the child has died, you cut the hand with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, resetting it equally.
from the issue of the child at his feet and if the child comes to its feet, you must lift them up; and then file little by little, until they are equal;
then pinch the flesh and stretch it little by little.
Can it jump up to the knees if commanded, and make it sneeze by pressing. if it jumps, if God wills it.
And if it is not feverish as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is lightly.
And if it does not come to pass as we have, say take a piece of flax thread, and silk oil, and melted gum, and grind them all in the mortar; and apply the nature of the woman inside and over this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs.
and when it is softened underneath, he makes a collar of myrrh, puts it there, and lets it remain one hour; then he makes it sit on the seat, then he makes it sneeze and holds its mouth and nose, and he gently rubs its belly, for the child jumps now.
of the issue from the child above his knees When the child comes into this form, place his hands little by little; then it is suspended around its neck, and its feet hang down, and it lies on the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then place its hands on the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until it is ready to hang down. and if the child does not come out, take its feet and twist them, then twist its head upward, and push with your hands; and slowly the child comes out; and instruct the woman to strain herself until the child comes out.
of the issue of the child which comes with one hand wide open it is necessary to devise ways to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go;
if she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, and twist her legs;
then administer the muscillaige as I have described;
and if she does not give birth, place her on the seat, then try to bring back the hand; and if the child is in its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to bear with it until the child passes.
From the birth of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the bail hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and she gently;
and when it is equal, place the natural muscular texture of flax and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little;
and when you have done this, place her on the seat, and instruct her to bear with it; and make them sneeze. in this same manner for all the secondine
in this same manner for all the secondine When it comes to force in this manner on the second joint, empty the second joint with your finger, until all the moisture is removed;
and if the injury can be made on its face and on its neck, then empty it from the mouth, do not hold it back, and suffocate the injury;
then put the child back in, until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to push once.
from the issue of the twins Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four are born. and this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens. These are strange things, and do not live, if at all;
These are strange things, and do not live, if at all; I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the syphilitic who devises them, who is attached to the mouth;
and sometimes they issue naturally like ten under one, as we have said.
And if they issue smoothly, the treatment as we have said, and let the fine cloth do quickly and easily what it does; and do so as it is worth to bring about healing. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the liver I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff know all this, for by accident such things happen. it should be done according to what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman who has died with a stillborn child or is pregnant, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to perform manual procedures; it is fitting that you know whether the woman is in good health, and has no complications or fear of death;
if it is necessary to treat the woman on her back, and let her shoulders inclined downward, and the legs raised;
and let the minister place her in two parts, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated when the child descends;
then rub the mouth of the patient with moist oils mixed with myrtle and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and spices.
then gently place them on the patient, then choose a location where she will lie that is suitable for this, and ensure that the child is prepared to descend onto her head.
If the lancet is inserted into his eyes or neck or in his mouth or under the palate or below the beard or in the temple or near the ribs, and if the descent is on a vein, then the lancet or knife and middle ribs are pierced;
And it is necessary that you hold the lancet in your right hand, and place the clamp between the fingers of your left hand, and gently press with all your hand, and insert the lancet into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the thing empty.
Then insert it against the other lancet, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal.
and then let it be equal in moving from one side to the other, to allow it to come out, and may the teeth be used to hold it, as is shown here:
And if a part of it remains, instruct the patient to move any of his eye muscles, and direct them to that part, and cut the other part;
And if there remains none of it, place this tooth or something higher on the area, and do so until all of it is out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to contraction, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until all of it comes out. then on the joint of the sole or with the knife, and so you must do in the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and the birth canal is narrow, or there is an acute swelling gathered, you must insert the pointed spatule between your hands, cut the swelling, and extract the acute swelling; or you may do it with the instrument called "almidach", whose form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this.
and do the same if the infant has a large head naturally.
and then cut the bones with the tongs, and if the head has come out and is held by the forceps, split it until the moisture that is more inside comes out.
and if it cannot come out, cut it out in pieces as you can.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or beneath the ribs, you must puncture it until the fluids flow.
And if the child is under its feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the birth canal is light.
And if it is swollen in the abdomen or the testicles, you must extract it with a knife wrapped in a cloth. and cut open the abdomen or the testicles until the fluids that are inside flow out.
and if the other limb is amputated and the head remains, pour hot oil on its hand to burn it, and cut it down to the opening of the wound. then one to two drops of wine or vinegar;
and if the opening of the boil is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come about, it should not be worked on, but rather moist and greasy substances should be applied. and apply plasters, and soak a cloth in moistening and softening water.
And if the injury is on his side, and you can set it equal, apply what we have said for a living child.
and if we do not have the ability, apply wine in small amounts, and do not leave any of the vinegar behind.
And when you have done this, administer to them what we have said for abscesses that come in the liver;
and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with cold water, and other dressings should be administered.
And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then I sutured the other [one] over it, and prevented the death of the other. After a long time, an abscess formed in the mouth, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
I was called for the treatment, and I thought long about it, and could not staunch the wound.
I applied a plaster with strong吸引力，从中取出了一块骨头，之后几天又取出了其他一些。 I marvelled much, for the belly has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wish the wound clean, and in my hands bones, until the woman was in better condition; and I kept the woman long thus, and it was indeed a little bone from the shoulder.
and I have recorded this chapter only because when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
After this comes the form of the presser, to which one applies the books;
and at two turns of the head of the two shoulders. All in all, the horns should be more delicate of the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth be twice as wide, and the margin of the branches one palm and a half long. and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of the same wood, which should be firmly fixed in both, half a palm long or a bit more.
and these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, resembling it more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and let it have two shoulder joints, as you see, of long width, and two bones of breadth;
and when you see the vein open for the entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, with her feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two shoulder joints of the instrument together into the vein, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then manipulate the instrument with your hand as you would with tongs, equally on both sides, according to the quantity that you see needs to open the mouth of the vein, so that it does what it should.
This instrument is entirely above ground, and its images are multiplied. And when the mirrors have been prepared, they are more haste in their work, and appear taller to them by virtue of their quantity.
If you do not use the instrument properly unless it is prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her hips, and then make her sneeze by sniffing condisi, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose. and if she jumps because of this, well done.
And if she does not jump, take a pot, and make a perforation or coverleap, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as caraway, rue, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury. all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water on the fire;
then put a cane or pertus in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the maris, until the vapors enter the maris;
then make him sneeze, as we have said. If the second joint moves quickly.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not cured, command the bailiff to moisten his left hand in sesame oil or in tallow grease, and then apply it to the affected area, and seek a second opinion. and when she has found it, take it out and extend it little by little straight, so that the maris does not cry at the extraction.
but it must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then treat; if it comes and is reduced.
And if the opening of the nostril is narrowed, we have said the treatment for sneezing and fumigating herbs.
and if it is not of all that we have said, take care that you do not err in treating.
but it must be that which is at the opening of the nostril, that you bind it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse with an ointment enema. if it heals and returns, and will come forth.
but nonetheless, when she [it] produces such a bad smell in the stomach and head, and causes the patient discomfort. Then one must therefore perform appropriate fumigations for it:
none of the ancients have proven the fumigation with cress and dried figs effective.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
And it appears similar to a cane, and one places the head subtlety in its nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the fumigations be above the coals, and the scab until it is weakened, and begin another.
Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but instead have it stopped by some subtle means. If it is necessary for the lady to pierce this side according to her duty, and she does not pierce it with a sharp spatillum, and be careful that the insertion does not touch it;
then place on moistened wool in wine and oil, and apply the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not close, put or hold a plug of lint, and let it remain in place, and be removed when the child seems ready to go into chambers.
And sometimes this塞封 comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cauterize it suddenly: if it needs to be treated, as we have said for the lead plunger.
Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodations, and grow larger as they leave the fundament, or in the space between two parts, for one fistula or many.
and when that node is old, you operate, and cure moist white or fine warts, and sometimes these Persian fistulas.
and they are known by those who experience excretion or windiness when the patient has an excretion, and by accident due to a sudden movement.
And if the fistulas extend as far as the bladder, and as far as the midpoint of the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint, and as far as the knee.
And thus one knows the Persian fistula in the anus, and not elsewhere: and it is that you place your index finger or foundation, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is tortuosity.
and if there is tortuosity, insert a thin catheter of linen, or horsehair, as long as you feel the catheter or hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or wind or pus, as we have said: you know that it does not perforate; if you hasten to treat.
And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the urethra, it will discharge urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
if it perforates to the hip joint, the catheter comes from that place. if there is no torsion and the source of the pain is within, it is set in place by itself, and neither medicine nor sudden application of ointment helps.
and in Persian fistulas there is no cure other than labor and the vain effort of foolish people who undertake it.
For those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on his back.
and the patient stretches his legs up to his thighs, and bends his knees toward his abdomen. then apply a bandage of linen or wool if there is torsion, as long as you know where the bandage should be applied.
If the patient feels pain deep within the pelvis, you must place your index finger there; if then you sense that the nerves have been punctured;
and if you discover that it is the sac or flesh between your finger and thumb, then you know it is perforated; if there is no travail there, it cannot be cured.
One can cure well some, but this happens rarely.
And the aid that one makes, it is that one heats the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and he heats it thoroughly in the fistula until it comes from the pelvis. and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred cinders have been burned, which resemble the feathers of a bird;
and then dress the wet wounds with butter until the cinders are out, then dress with ointment to heal the flesh and join it.
If it is thus set, it is well.
If this, cannot be cured otherwise;
and if the tent is inserted, and does not pierce to the depth which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent place a thick covering of flesh or grease, and you will see the fistula where the covering is removed. if the pus from the beginning of the fistula, and apply it before the tent, and cauterize after, until it reaches the head of the tent. and the tent will be released, and fall;
and remove those charred marks that seem like a bird's feather, and let none remain.
And if the seton fails and cuts between you and the wound, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
For the fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the burning of these charred areas, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
and the treatment of wet tents with butter or ground cheese, until the wounds emit pus, and then let the charred areas burn in the pus;
and treat the wound with tight ointments containing hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is sound and does not return again.
And if the fistula comes just to the point of the fundament and is distant from the body, touch or place your finger at the fundament, and inquire it.
If you feel the tent and between them is linen or silk or flesh, or it is about to pierce, do not have any outlets unless there is a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cautery it as we have said, or you cauterize it through and through, or if you can, put in tents and dressings as before;
and do not apply too much powder, so that you do not cauterize the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the excretions come through it without willing it; then dress the wound as we have said;
then dress the wound as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it is cauterized from the foundation, or with a tent or another pointed instrument; then cleanse the wounded flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula below the fundament:
then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula below the fundament: if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, and it is situated near the fundament beneath the skin, take a probe pierced at the end according to this form: And you poke the thread into two turns, and push the tent onto all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the tip.
and if it is deep within the margin of the fundament, then extract the thread of that puncture, as you would insert your finger or probe.
and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, hold them against each other, and let them one day or two.
and hold them together once, until the thread covers the spaces between the two, and sews.
then treat the wound until it is stitched and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, make it perforate in all ways that you can, provided it is not too close to the surface. For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if too close to the surface, and then treat, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spinous spur from which we make the fistula is very acute and sharp. and on the other hand, no, because what should not be covered is not to be sewn, as you see here:
Abscesses are according to two methods: or they are within the foundation, as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and inside it is blood, and there are one or more, and they protrude from the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
but those that protrude have little moisture, and inside are a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to sweat in order to release into rooms, until the foundation comes forth, and the threads appear; if you are in a hurry, and it can be held with tongs, or you hold it with your fingernail, then pull it by its roots.
and if the censer cannot hold them due to moisture, they take it by the cord, or with cotton, or a piece of camlet; and extract them with both hands, then copes them, and sprinkle over them some warm powders that are used for the fire cautery; or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, and treat them with other dressings until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, you cauterize the patient with a caustic cloth to wash away what is at the foundation, so that it may come out clearly; and if the patient presents symptoms, and if the threads are broken at the foundation, then the treatment is light;
and if the patient presents symptoms, and if the threads are broken at the foundation, then the treatment is light; and you should grasp them with your finger or tongs, cut them off, then treat and clean them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with iron. It is necessary that you administer the suturing according to this manner:
It is necessary that you administer the suturing according to this manner: take a thread of cloth, and put it through a needle, and then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be wide;
and hold the thread tight, then tie the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do so with all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood.
then place a pad of woolen cloth in oil of rose or ointment, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and let it be until it heals, and when they have healed, give them ointment and other treatment until he is cured.
of dry the wound or foundation Many times, there is a sudden drying up of bile in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. Then you must reset at the end of a splinter or under your nail the bark above, which you leave to dry. and cure it until it is healed as it should be.
and if it cannot heal, then resume the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals and is scorched. then treat until he is healed.
of trembling A formice is a small deceitful appearance on the body, and goes very quickly.
and sometimes the truth is found when it is touched, and one feels it like a death tremor, spreading throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill from an ostrich feather, or a very strong eagle feather, and place the quill on the tremor, so that the red circle completely encircles the tremor. then turn your hand around the quill so that you cover the tremor completely, and apply it well, rooting out the tremor from its roots.
And if you see, do it with a needle of spider silk or iron according to this form, and make it thin underneath and drawing on top: ne mie perciet, pour mieux tenir au doigt, et mouvoir presser.
And if you see, cauterize the fremit, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes one makes a blister with silver or mercury, or melted lead or mesh;
and sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are applied. Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and in pain, are small.
Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and in pain, are small. The shape of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the breasts are tied in this manner:
and there be a deviation or the stomach be tied, as you see, and the head be pierced within;
and have two perforations on one side, and one on the other.
and let the wounds where one places the medicines from an animal bladder or parchment be pierced entirely with small perforations, and there should be a thumb's breadth between each perforation, then pour in these perforations strong thread twisted into ten or more parts, and join the wound as one would a sheep. and when the medicine is inside, seal it with a strong thread at the opening of the instrument, then cauterize;
and this is the form of the circle:
and let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently. then the minister draws it with both hands until it is completely full, then removes the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine seems to come out, he lets the patient urinate as much as he can. and if it sleeps all night, it is greater help.
And if you clysterize for a disease of bowel discharge, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as much as he is healed.
and if the hemorrhoid is external or internal, or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin is compressed:
We have already said in the division of treating wounds:
Or we will say of the treatments of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or parts where they are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or a lance or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or by those made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the thigh, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is by the impact of a stone or similar things, and the skin is always torn and the wound large, and you slightly suspect an abscess. if you find the head of the shoulder soonest in need of healing when little blood comes from the wound, and let it be healed on the contrary side of the broken part;
and choose the patient who is full of wine and large meats.
and if he does not wish to be healed, let his flesh be reduced, and do not let him drink wine or eat meat.
and place on the wound, if abscesses form and come to a head, only moistened cotton in rose oil, or in styptic wine.
and if there is no warm abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
and if the physician has bled it, he should apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, sew them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.
If the wound is exposed to bone and is unstable, holding only by a little, then bind it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat solid meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, like poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotten skin and it does not affect the bone, then cover the rot entirely, apply powder, and then treat it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely, and cannot be stopped by medicines, then ligature the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which seals as if the arsenic has melted.
And the manner of the powder is: take frankincense in part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live charcoal 3 parts, and make the powder fine. Apply it to the wound and bind it tightly so that it dries well and joins with all its blood;
and then drain well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with wax alone, when one does not have incense nor the dragon's blood, but lets the arsenic act upon the wound.
And if the herb has already healed the wound, even while it was healing, one does not apply this powder.
but apply some digested salves, or pulses of wheat flour made with water and honey, until it exudes pus. then continue the treatment with other salves until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps.
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
from the wound of the neck
If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other way but to let the cure proceed, and not apply anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to wither; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity lies with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but use medicines warm, such as boiled oil in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and cooked in sweet water, and other mined stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, suture and bind it with bandages, then let the wound heal.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce them or lower down a vein.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding results, then evacuate it, ligate it, and cauterize as the occasion demands;
And if the spinal cord of the throat is cut or the nerves are damaged, and the conduit through which the flesh passes is preserved, sew the nerve on the tongue of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form. And then hold it in place properly, and leave it for some days, then treat it with good ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then treat it; and if there are bone fragments, if you can extract them all, do so. For those you cannot remove, let the wound rot and drain the pus out;
and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if from the wound air reaches where the patient feels pain: then you know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it or let it dry for the blood that may clot properly and return to the heart, and kill the patient. but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if no spasm comes, nor bad trembling of the heart or any strain from the soul; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. Tend to it and apply other treatments until he is healed;
and if it cannot heal, operate, and then know that there is a fistula;
if the treatment as we must. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then the treatment for what is in front; if it is large, to suture;
and if it is small, with powder; and if it is deep into the bone, and has cut pieces, clean the wound, and the foreign objects if they are loose; and if they are not loose, leave the wound to drain, and lighten the extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
for the rupture of the belly
The dislocations of the belly are large and medium and small;
From the large wound if any of the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, due to their protrusion;
and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because we cannot easily return the intestines to their place without warming them first;
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and cannot be returned to place, and for this reason, the medium wound is more painful, because we must properly position the intestines in their place rather than leaving them displaced.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
the two common stitches occur in the belly stitch, and the other two stitches are common to other wounds.
and in all ways they are more suitable with the belly stitch, and I will say each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and no internal organ is injured, and nothing needs to be replaced, it can be done in one of the two manners. or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it with a fire in such a manner: wet a sponge or a cloth in cold water only, or heat it in water with cinnamon and cypress and spike, and wring out the excess until it is fragrant.
and after doing this with the cooling wine, let it sit to infuse in order to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or cooked almond milk, for this makes the entrance easier to pass.
and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids.
and the first dressing is to be moistened that the cut, we must not cut unless there is great necessity for it.
and these are the instruments to cut:
if you cut inward in the curve and outward not, and see to the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has protruded, replace it rearward according to its natural form in its proper place if you have the ability, for this requires movement.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the stomach, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the stomach, place the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the stomach is in one of the two parts, set things so that the severed part is higher than the other.
and thus it must be applied to those I speak of concerning great and medium wounds.
For small wounds, apply what is prepared for you, then have at hand the herb that covers the entire wound with its leaf, and stitch the edges;
and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound. Leave at the beginning of the wound a space, and insert a needle with a good strong thread; and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the needle, which is beneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and stitch the two ends of the needle together.
then draw out with a double thread between two parts of the needle, then join the two heads of the wound properly, and then leave two fingers' space, and put in another needle;
then draw out the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this as needed for the needles until the entire wound is closed;
and use medium-sized needles, between fine and large ones, for fine needles cut all the flesh, and too large needles do not enter well. for they should be medium-sized;
and it is not appropriate to insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, as they might cut and enlarge the wound before suturing.
and then take the heads of the needles, for they may discolor the patient during sleep, and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound heals;
and this needle sewing method is more suitable for small wounds, because it uses one needle or two.
The second sewing method is common, and it involves assembling the two heads of the leather and the two sides of the flesh together using one needle with a strong middle thread.
and when you have pierced these heads together completely, draw the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner we sew cloth.
and place an interval between each stitch the size of a small pea;
this stitch suits the wound, and I sutured a wound on one man's thigh, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width great, and contained two palms' width of intestines, and it was in the abdomen.
I returned the intestine to its place after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I cured it, and he was healed.
And the master had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in the place where none could be found, and no medicine was available. and applied old cotton twice a day to the wound, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or I will tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and fill it from the outside until the inside;
when it has pierced the core straight through, leave the head of the needle at the abscess or costit or where you have filled the needle, and make it pierce from inside until the outside.
and the understanding of this suturing is that you stitch as a leatherworker makes leather, and that you leave the abscess on one side and close it on the other until the suturing is entirely completed.
The second method of suturing, as Galen properly describes, is such that no one does it, where they bring the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the needle from the abscess to the other end, in this manner:
prick with a needle or a point of the knife close by, and pierce only that side, and let the two head bones be intact. then turn the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner, through the two head bones.
then pierce both from the outer part to the inner, through the other two head bones that are on the opposite sides.
and this is the main way and the most common method of suturing.
Galien said this word, and none testify, that one must stitch the belly with two needles, each having thread.
and one must prick with a needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corrodied [tissue].
and know that when the tear is within the abdomen, the sewing is more grievous than with other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as the arrow has made it, you must reset the intestines and the stitch;
then put on powder for flesh growth, and if the arrow has made it, put on any ointment that is at hand until the wound heals. and cut the threads, and let the sutures be sewn, and the maggots; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, place old cloth on it as soon as it begins to discharge pus, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no need of other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound may communicate with the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light linement in tempered heat oil, or in rosemary oil, and apply it between the layers, and under the bindings;
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this often happens, then use enemas of black must, especially if the putrefaction comes as far as the intestines;
and puncture it internally, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small.
The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the problem of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, reset it back in place as with the intestines, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turned brown or black, then you must tie the vein which is black, to prevent blood from flowing, because there are veins and arteries there.
then cut what is between the tendons, and place the two heads hanging from below the part beneath the wound until above to ease the extraction when the roots fall, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the vein
When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, one can restore them in some cases, for I have seen men whose abdomen was pierced by a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became necrotic and turned into a fistula, from which there flowed excretions and caused wind.
I treated it as well as I could, and did not cease to cauterize until it was healed, and the wounds were sutured.
And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he improved in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and the experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a manner: take flax from large flints, then close the edges of the wound, and when the flax has opened the mouth, place it on the two edges, so that it closes its mouth around.
and then cover the head, and it stays such that it cannot be undone, then place another piece of flax in this manner as before, until the wound is completely soaked. and let the wound heal.
If they burn in the intestine, and cause no harm to the patient, one can suture the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
take the end of this intestinal thread that is well unshrunk, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread on the needle, and suture the intestine, and secure it at the wound.
and this method of suturing does not prevent the hiss from escaping as long as it is done with hope and expectation.
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestine's folds, there is no means to know, only by subtlety.
of fistula or it be Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula," and especially when it is closed and round.
And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it is also veined like the feathers of an eye.
and sometimes clear, and at other times thick; sometimes few, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken about the division of wounds: that every wound that is not healed and has no flesh can only be due to one of the nine causes: that is to say, due to the small amount of blood or flesh; or because of its malignity; or because there is hard flesh within and on the lips, do not allow it to grow flesh. or there is too much blood; or the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature; or because of the property in the region is late in digestion, and recovery is delayed, and it swells by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or it must be that I shall teach you the treatment of an abscess caused by manual intervention.
Fistula occurs in all body members; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and the arteries, and the nerves, or in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and it often affects the property of the principal limb, and similar ones.
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not heal until the point I have said, and you are confident in the treatment, and you see it known, then take a wick of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight, apply it;
and if the fistula is curved, search for a fine wick of flax, because flax can bend around the curvature.
and if the fistula has ends closed and you cannot well search it with wicks, cleanse it by enema through one of the ends, for moisture conducts quickly from one end to another, and cleanses it.
then apply a cauterization within your power, so you can know if there is bone or nerve, and see if it is healed. And ask the patient the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and locate where he feels it.
and when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then apply the poultice as I have said, and remove the foreign matter and the corrupted flesh that are within;
and then the treatment until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the right place, you must apply the poultice thoroughly as much as you can. Then put wet cloths in medicated water, and pour them until they reach the head of the fistula, so that the medicine erodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
and then apply salve to healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not known by them, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then treat.
If the vein or nerve does not affect the main parts, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, scrape until all the corruption is removed, then treat the wound with substances that promote healing until it heals.
and if it is not healed, and you need to bind it as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
and expose and remove the corruption completely until you reach the bottom, then reset it.
and if it is thus healed, that is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot cure it; if there is no other way but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can remove it with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this. And if there are many bones, remove all of them, not leaving any behind;
and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something putrefying on the wound, and let it remain until the flesh is rotted away beneath the bones, then the bones will be easier to handle.
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, reset only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part of the corruption reaching to the marrow of the bone; And it is necessary to sew and cover until the corruption reaches the marrow, and then treat until it heals.
And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
There was a young man between XXX years and thirty who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so much so that the materials came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and did not have any reason to open.
but the physician, out of his folly, opened it too much, and drained a great deal of material from the abscess, and it became a fistula, and many perforations came that all gave off pus and moisture from the body;
and many physicians treated it for two years, and there was no wise one in the art of hands, so much that I was called and saw his leg and the medicines with which they had treated him, and what drained through the perforations caused great discomfort; and the face of the young person turned red, and had a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and drew back one of the wounds until I revealed a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and perforated, and the corruption came up to the bone within;
I thought that what appeared to me of the corrupt bone was all there was, and that there was no other corruption beyond what I removed.
and began to treat the wound with long-lasting medicines, but could not heal it.
and then began again, and revealed the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and removed it, and pondered how to set the bone. but I could not so much as probe between the fingers of the bone, and it was pierced to its marrow, then I reset it with medicine; and it was healed and stitched quickly, and it did not seem necessary to restart the work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of death regarding him. For often there is bloodletting due to evacuation, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard scar, and it was well positioned and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take the ligature, and draw it tight at the end of the bone that is open, and instruct him to extend it upwards; and put another ligature of thicker linen over the first ligature, and tie it around the flesh that is adjacent to the bone, and draw tight, so that you can drain the corrupt flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh at the place where you wish to treat it, lest the knot press against the flesh.
and place a coal or a board under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
and it must be sochar as one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then expose all the flesh;
then place the coal underneath, and then char from one part to another the corruption, and let the charring last as long as the corruption, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then char the corrupt joint, and chare the bone on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but copper.
and if the corruption is from a sword wound in the hand or foot, this is very serious. But nonetheless, you must inquire about the corruption and how it presents itself. and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but ensure that the vein or nerve does not oppose this.
and know that the incision and the suturing for coppering these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their hardness and softness. and for this, it must be prepared according to each kind of work its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you think about the instrument you will need according to what is appropriate.
The shoulder dislocates either from within, or from without.
and when you have treated the corrosion with medicine and it does not improve, then you must cut into that limb to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient either escapes death or the greater malice of the member's defect.
and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, follows the corruption of limb to limb, and takes place throughout the body;
if it is due to the bite of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar ones, if the corruption is at the head of the limb, so the copers, and do not give it any chance to come to the hand.
and if it comes to the hand, apply the copers at the joint, so that the corruption does not spread to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, apply the copers at the wound.
and if it passes the blade, it is death, and no remedy outside will avail for its virtue;
and do so likewise when the腐蚀 comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, then bind after the other joint;
and if it comes or pierces, bind all around the piercing. and if it rises to the thigh, bind at the joint of the knee;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;
and the manner of binding or securing the limb is that you bind it both above and below, extending some fingers downward along one length, and others upward along the other length, and you cut the flesh that is between the two lengths to a finger's width, so that the bone is revealed.
then the cloth or skin, and place a linen bandage on each side, so that the skin does not touch the healthy part, and bring about another injury or abscess.
And if the bleeding comes when you work, cauterize the skin quickly, or put some restraining powders on it.
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to the man in som piet.
he had a burn that seemed to be scorched by fire, and this corrosion first came to his toe on the foot, spreading throughout the entire foot.
and when the wound shows corruption, he hastens to cover it, and it is healed;
and long thereafter corruption or another hand wound returned, and he came to me, and I placed on him things reflective after the purification of the body, but the corrosion could not cease;
and he vowed that I should cauterize his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of reflecting the matter; and I doubted also that if I cauterized his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak;
and he utterly despaired, and returned to his land, and hastened to cauterize his hand, and it was healed;
and I have included this only because we need to do so, if we have occasion.
Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh, and persists so long that it causes a great gathering of pus. and then they will come to a head and pierce it, and the pus will burst, leaving the eyes open, as if in vessels. and the skin above is as delicate as fine cloth, and does not extend all the way to the bone or to the nerve. Such a disease is called "sain" and is not called "fistula.
but if it is so long that it extends all the way to the bone through deep seated pus, it is called "fistula.
and the skin is such that you peel off all of it, and especially when it is delicate, like threads; and does not rot due to its decay.
And if you find that the skin will rot, and the decay is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it by scraping thus:
look if the swelling is large, and the vein within it has a foul odor, then use the medicated paste of Egyptian medicine thus made: take asecel (a type of plant), oil, and litharge, equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of it according to your necessity, and do it in water and honey, and with a clyster irrigate the side, and hold the wound steady. and let the medicine remain in place for 2 hours, then extract it by pressing.
do this many times, until the side is thoroughly cleansed, and let it dry completely.
and once with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and use ashes from vine wood, pour water over it, then drain it, and clysterize again until you know that the side is well cleansed.
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey or add a little bromide of antimony. or you apply it with honey and wine, where the honey has the property to purify and wash, and the wine makes it hot.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well purified, you apply a plaster to induce perspiration, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you apply it with certain medications and ointments, of which I have spoken about their properties in treating ointments;
and if the hole in the breast is small and the catheter cannot enter, you enlarge it slightly with a iron, and place therein a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too large, sew it up leaving it just enough for the needle or thread to enter, and if the puncture wound from which the blood flows is above, let the dressing be higher than where it is.
and if you cannot dress the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the blood flows to the lowest part where it is. For when the blood is fully drained, do not let any flesh rot, and if you cannot dress the wound as you see fit, arrange it accordingly: that the blood flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the blood;
that the blood flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the blood; and take healing medicines to put on the wound, and keep them under a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then apply the forces near the puncture in the breast a little larger than the first, and spread ointment on the other cloth according to the size of the puncture, and place it over the puncture of the wound to alleviate the pain, and do not remove the large cloth from outside for several days at one time.
and that which is over the puncture in the breast, remove often to alleviate the pain, and know what comes from the wound, whether it is venom or little, enough, or digestible, or undigestible.
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner, and you see the nature that appears over the puncture of the wound, then know that the breast has already swollen, and bring help.
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are people who have delayed healing in their wounds, and among those who do the opposite;
and if undigested food jumps from the chest after many days, know that the chest is not digesting properly;
and if the chest takes time to digest and is far from complete, apply medications that are both drying and warming in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment of diafinity, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is one of the last remedies.
take an ointment of yarrow, and make it with rose oil, and pour it with old wine equal in strength;
then let it infuse and use it;
and the same made better by cooking and thickening, when yarrow ointment is not present, or you take myrrh, frankincense, and cinnamon, grind them, and mix with honey when it is on the fire;
and then apply it with bandages, and place it under the skin, and administer several times by an astrologer longea and roots of celestial lilies, which are as fine as wheat flour and cornflower; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey as I have said, and use it;
and if the wound is long and not treated with this treatment, know that the corruption is more advanced and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in the ligaments; if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
Fistula is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is matured, and no attention is taken to it, it comes to an abscess, spreading and discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may even reach the entire nail;
and the corrosion reaches to the bone, causing pain that smells bad, and the shoulder of the arm is wide, and the color fades.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the wound does not heal, then you must cut away all the remaining superfluous tissue from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauteries are much great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to pierce it, and the bleeding starts, then you must place a rag under the nail where the flesh is pierced, elevate the hand, and carefully and gently remove that thin flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all of it. then dress with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it forcefully, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the hand corrupted, treat it as described above, then cure it until it is healed;
and if it is wounded and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it;
then cut the nail of the thumb sharply across, but be sure that the cuts do not come all the way to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it does, then apply something that soothes.
the dislocation that arises in some men by accident is either all fleshy, and sometimes has a tear or it has bones, and once it has a nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some knuckle.
That which arises in any notch of the hand does not move, and that which arises at the joint of the hand may sometimes move.
the size of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: size it at its root with a broad spatulum.
That which arises at the root of the joint should be carefully treated: if it touches the bone.
In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate blade, and cure it until it is healed.
The symptoms that come together in this way come from birth, or suddenly from a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
It is necessary that you correct that seam so that it heals according to its natural forms; then place between two moist cloths or towels in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you place between two pieces of fine cloth until the edges are joined as is proper.
If the wound comes together with one of these two using the palm, cut this wound as is fitting.
When their veins are swollen enveloped with excess melancholic humours, which come from many members of the body;
and it occurs more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, you must administer to him once an evacuation of black bile, and then cure him with the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one way is to incise and bleed the black blood; and the other method is to open the vein and let all the black blood flow out.
The incision is done in this manner: first apply the hot iron strongly, until the large vein becomes fine, then straighten the leg of the patient from below the hip to the part below the knee;
then open the vein in I or II or III, of a wide size, then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the virtues of the patient can bear.
and then coagulate it, and instruct the patient to dye it with meat juice from blackened meat.
and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The manipulations of the head are according to this manner: realign the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then immerse it in warm water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins.
and if you have no bath, heat it on the fire, and then apply it to the vein from the long bone to the head of the kneecap, or in the area below the ankle.
then prick the skin with an awl, and scorch the vein from each side, until it appears when you feel it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems as if it were a white cord.
then draw out the thread from under, until it is raised from the skin, and then prick it with an awl lightly, then apply it in another place above three digits.
then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it from the wound as you have done, and prick it with another awl as you did first.
then cut another size, or several if you need them, then lift it out and cut again with the point of the knife, then draw and lift until reaching the second size;
then extract piece by piece until it is completely free, then cut;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert an awl through the entire thread, strong and doubled, and draw and lift it, and remove from the wound, and turn your hand to the left and right until it comes out; and make sure it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot pull and lift it, and this will harm the patient;
and when you have treated it completely, place wetted wool in wine and rose oil over the site of the wound; and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must untwist it gently, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before.
The iron form used to treat the vein is curved, and you should not cut it, but instead do not damage the vein.
and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would damage the vein. But it should be large, as we have said, and here is its form:
This vein is present in legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it arises elsewhere than in legs, and this happens from the putrefaction that comes from the skin, as it comes within the body worms and vermin, growing between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then change the eyes, and begin the vein to issue forth, as one root of a plant.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated, you should wrap it in a piece of linen about one and a half inches to two inches wide, and tie it, and let the linen hang from the leg, and every time there is no point at the fracture, you should wrap it again with the linen and the bow.
and if it is too long, you should shorten it by cutting a part, and wrap the remaining piece, but do not cut it at its root until it is completely removed. if you close it, it enters into the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, or bone, and bad illness;
because of that thing, it should be treated little by little until healing, and nothing or a scab should remain;
and it is sometimes this vein when treated with the palms of long, or ten, and one inch twenty came to me, from which it issued twelve palm lengths long, and when you close it, it produces one fistful or a pertus, and pierces deeply, so that all is released;
and drain the matter within, and apply medicines that combat putrefaction to the area each day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein, many pains, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or hand, and there comes much of perforations, and from which sprout many pains;
Cure it therefore as we have said before.
vers which arise between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "bovine disease," because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and travels up and down the body, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it destroys the skin where it goes, and sprouts forth;
and it is engendered from putrefaction of some humors, such as coming from worms and larvae and ascarids or intestines;
and if there is doubt or from his cunning, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cure and draw, one cannot force it when it goes:
then you must tie the vein above and below with a strong thread tightly. Then cut it open and draw out, and if you find that the blood has already filled the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it stops.
and the greatest harm it causes is that it can run into the eye, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the eye, hold firmly over it, then cover up, and pull strongly;
and it is necessary to use the patient for bodily washing with soluble medicines for putrid humors, and beware of meats that cause putrefaction.
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member.
and I see what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
and shortly after, the vein swell up as if by a worm in the shoulder, faster than anything else, as if live silver when it is cut from another.
the pain departed from that place and pierced into the shoulder, and then a little while after spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
then she turned inward in the body, as I saw.
I wondered greatly how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease proceed in such a way. In all ways, I wanted very much that the pain move from one place to another, but I did not want it as I saw in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a hard core and exposed veins, and because these conditions caused the wind torments to appear.
and they do not appear according to this reason for those who are sensitive and have moist bodies and veins opened.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, scrape off the top and underneath hastily, and then cover over until the wind diseases have left their place. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, cure it as those who expel wind diseases, such as bitter pills, and pillbugs, and similar things.
Arrows are of various kinds, according to their shapes and the places in which they lodge.
The diversity of them is such that some have large points, small ones, and hooked, and fused. and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are parts;
and that which falls into any member, it falls according to two manners: or in the principal member it moves to, such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls in any part of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, appear: then you must be wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases. and when none of these bad signs appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then remove it and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a swelling arises which is above the brain, is when there is scotomia and stiffness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perchance it is without strength in the nostrils, or the ears; and perchance loses speech and voice; and the swelling of the wound appears moist and white, resembling a pulse, and also swells as if scalded by hot water;
and if this sign is apparent, keep the wound clean, and extract the arrow if it is present.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and one feels it as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty. and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulses, and brings black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then you will doubt that many die.
And the sign of the arrow that never came out is that without bubbles of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and refreshes himself with cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the foot, it hurts the small bones; and causes great pain and great suffering and sighs; and it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls onto the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
And if the arrow falls onto the belly, and it jumps out leaving some hay through the intestinal tract, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine spurts out and flows, the patient feels great pain. The wound is fatal.
The other limb, such as the arm, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary bone, spine of the back, femur, and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell into his arm at the root of the neck: I extracted it, and removed the rest beneath the fatty tissue behind the ear, and he was cured without any difficulty.
And I extracted an arrow that fell into the fatty tissue of the eye beneath the membrane, and the arrow was embedded, and could not be reached except its tip toward the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, made of light iron without ears.
the patient was healed, and no bad accidents occurred.
And they extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears.
I extracted the barbs, and pried open as I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And they extracted an arrow from the man, where it was stuck in his chest or abdomen, and thought he would die.
and after XXX days had passed, his condition did not change at all. I incised the arrow, closed it up, and extracted it, and no bad accidents occurred.
And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow fall or pass through him, and the wound is sewn up;
and if the arrow remains inside, and does not change its natural position, nor causes harm to any of its natural functions.
And if another man has an arrow enter his face, and the wound is sewn up; and remains there causing great pain.
and many other similar cases.
And extract an arrow from a prince's man that was shot among the straw, and it was slightly inclined to the right side. and the arrow was completely withdrawn.
I was called for the treatment after it was dropped for three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I handled it with great subtlety, and did not feel it at all; and he felt pricking and pain over his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed on the wound a plaster of atratiferous digestive ingredients, because the wounds did not swell. and I saw the wound from the arrow.
and I saw the wound from the arrow. I applied the plaster for three days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
and he tells them. I applied corrosive salve to the wound with my fingers as long as it was open, and probed it, feeling the head of the arrow which was rotting away at the site.
then I adjusted the opening of the wound with this corrosive salve until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
and passed well through the ends within four months, and then extracted the arrow by enlarging the wound, using forceps to pull it out from both sides, and it could not come out.
then I continued to innovate and devise methods with instruments until I successfully extracted it with forceps on the seventh day, as described in the form that will come at the end of this chapter. Thus, I restored the wound.
And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound healed, and the patient was cured entirely.
Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot contain everything;
but the master arrowsmith compares only a very small amount, and on what is present and lacking, finds nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are embedded in the limbs only according to two manners: or through the shoulder or they enter, or by another part;
and that which passed through it or where it entered, is an arrow entering into the muscles, and passed but once now.
And if it does not pass now, let it be until the flesh rots entirely, and allow it to come out.
and also if it is embedded in the bone, and cannot come out, let it be so for some days, and change each day.
and then it will pass. And if it does not pass, pierce through entirely with a sharp needle, until the muscles inside are widened, and then withdraw it.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body and cannot be seen, then seek it with all means. and if you feel it, draw it with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot do it due to the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, widen the wound so that the wound is large;
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has feathers that it holds onto, remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides of the feather that you can reach, and then break or bend the feathers of the arrow so that you can extract it;
and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you can extract it more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the joint is rotten, then remove it, for the extraction is painful. And if the bleeding makes it contrary, administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and place something as you can to easily draw the arrow without danger, or soon or late, firmly or gently;
and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot, then align him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, or where it penetrates any part of the body, or the skin is swollen so that one can see or feel it apparently:
Raise the tweezers up, as far as they can grasp, and then extract: if it should now jump out.
And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, pull it out completely;
and if the shaft has fallen and you see that it must be extracted, then use the hooked instrument to administer the pull, so that the point of the arrow enters the hook of the instrument;
and then extract it completely, and if the arrow is hooked, use the instrument at the point entering it to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is touching, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut open, then you must cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if skill is needed. and the treatment until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form:
And there are many ways about this: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the feathered rod is similar to the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in the form:
Of veins through which one draws blood, there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are principal, that is to say: Two bumps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that runs along the forehead; and the vein that is at the root of the nose; and the two glands that are in the throat; and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
The veins through which we commonly bleed are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head. and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica veins, and they call it "vein of the heart. and the basilic vein is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the fosse, and it is the one through which we bleed, which opens clearly above the pit.
And the vein called the radial is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two sinuses;
and in the leg or foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the left pocket, and the second is sophene, which is on the right ankle; and the vein called "nese," which is in the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The sinew of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
and the qualities of the healthier part, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a screw, so that the two veins behind the ears are visible in two places dependent on the head. place your thumb there, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, cut there.
then take the lancette, and make the incision from below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire length of the vein, and cut through the skin and vein thoroughly in two depths, and let the blood flow out until you see it.
then extract and bind, while she is sound;
and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for migraines, sore eyes, and long-term blindness, and for tears in the eyes;
and the qualities of the healing are as I say: and it is that the patient's collarbone is extracted so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel the pulse beneath your throat, and then continue with the procedure;
then lift the heart above the vein at your index finger, and place the lancet below, and lift the vein and the flap as you did in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put on a cloth. and then press it firmly, and hold it until it is healed.
and we have also spoken of their application and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
The treatment of the vein on the forehead is just as effective for the cephalic vein in diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for rheumatism.
and the quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "fosseur," whose form is as follows:
and place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see. then straighten the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is sound, and only once the work is done with a wide flame.
In any case, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too hot; and apply the flame in a crosswise direction, for the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may burn through when it is fine.
The health of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands helps them, and with headache, and with redness, and with the orbital part of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
and the quality of their health is such that diseases escape them by twisting at any point, as mentioned before;
then the healthy one, and let its length be a bit long, its width a bit wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are fine, they might break;
then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then tie it with thread, and tie it well.
The health of the vein near the neck is good for water, and for hard scurvy, and for diseases of the face, as in migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient feels pain in his neck, then in his nose when you grasp it with your left hand, and take the fine long flax thread, and insert it between the two nostrils, because the veins do not open well otherwise, and the sweat will begin to flow now;
and do not apply it too strongly, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
The health of the two glands helps in the narrowing of the alaina, and in the beginning of mesenteritis, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and estiomenes;
and the qualities of health are such that diseases remove their roots from both sides, as we have said.
and let the masters be on the side of the patient's head, and let the diseases settle on the seat, then heal the vein along a long narrow path, and draw off tempered blood, or as much as is needed.
and do the same on the other vein, then release the bond, and moderately restrain all the veins, so that diseases do not choke. and let it remain until the morning, so that the wound heals.
of the sinew of the glands The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and around the nose and between them.
And the quality of the healed state is to sit the patient in front of you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by these: one is black and by the small black veins around them.
then prick both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then prick the largest one from each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, for they are of the same kind.
of the disease beneath the tongue The veins that are beneath the tongue help after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is due to the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the uvea, and diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the healing are that the patient feels relief in their hands before the sun, and the tongue becomes light, and look beneath on each side a black vein:
then heal both, and do not perfect them too much, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly healed are treated according to two methods:
or with pricking all the large flame mint leaves, or subtle olive oil as you hear sharp, and is called "anisil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The form of the martyr's flame is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
and it has need to open the large veins full of visible blood, and those containing much mingled blood; and it is the form of olive oil flame:
And it is more pointed subtle, and is for cleansing thin veins, or where there is thin yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the eyes, and the abdomen;
and it is fitting for the patient to bleed and to avoid the artery that is below. And if he wounds the artery and a hemorrhage occurs, it is fitting to stop the bleeding as I have said. and must not be pricked by the flame, but cut as with a razor.
And if the basilique does not open clearly, then you must extract it, and replace it with another; or you take out some of it, or you treat with it the vein inserted in the arm: it opens clearly; and the wound with the flame razor, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place to treat, then you must extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the head of the shoulder, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with flame. and be sure that you do not injury the artery when you see the head swollen, for it is the artery. use it then.
And if you see it bulge up high as urine in a child, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is veins of the artery. hasten then, and place your finger lengthwise, then remove your finger when the vein has stopped bleeding, for this often happens. bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the limb for the patient.
and for fear, and do not let him move until he is healed.
And if the wound is not cleansed and it pains you, and medical assistance is not present, open the artery if it appears, for the head of the retraction is needed. and cleanse the wound.
And take a bark of flax, cut it open, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day.
and if the wound is cleansed, that is good. and if not, treat it as we have said, using powders that cleanse blood.
and the cauterizations are not suitable for many positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
and the surgeon must be careful beneath the nerve, and if it is too close, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, then the cauterization will not heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must anesthetize the surgeon with a麻醉剂; and cut the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it open along its length.
The health of the cephalic vein helps, for it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes;
and it is better to treat with pressure from olive oil flame or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not cross any nerve or artery. In any case, it is best to choose the lightest vein, and do not harm anything if it needs to be done for the first time, and one should repeat the procedure. and sometimes the eyes swell in some people when it needs to be done for the first time, but it should not harm anything.
The quality of the sinew is according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know of a physician, is that medicine is not practiced for gain and to preserve health, and to avoid future diseases;
and let medicine be performed in one of the three veins that are called: that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and the physician should be called at the beginning of spring and autumn, and after eating in winter, when signs of fullness appear;
and the physician should be called on the first or third day after two or three days.
The medicine administered for diseases has no fixed hour, but whenever need arises, at any hour and at all times.
and it is not advisable to treat children up to fourteen years of age, nor women who have been pregnant for less than seven months. Old people who have passed sixty years should not be treated either.
And when anyone wishes to be treated, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that he purge the bowels with a light enema, if there is little retained feces, so that the veins do not receive from the intestines the putrefied superfluities harmful to the principal limbs.
nor is it advisable to treat those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, to the point of being heavily intoxicated, nor dropsies.
and if one wishes to treat after colic passion, vomiting, and belly discharge, and frequent intercourse in women, and labor, and watching and fasting, and those whose virtue is entirely diminished, or by something of the weapon or of the body.
then subtly resolve the humors, if the swelling is great, through meats and through beverages and through medications, if you have the power;
then by bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly resolve the blood, and heal the vein near the foot between the third toes as we have said;
and keep him from work, labor, and luxury, and similar things;
and be bound and joined, and let the healthier be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then remove the bandage moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the swelling cannot subside.
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
then moisten the veins with a bit of old oil, then place his left hand over the vein under the area to be treated so that the vein does not dry or burn.
For there are veins that flow like cords during the procedure, and some are filled with wind or air, such that when you place them near the flame, you must withdraw the flame, as you cannot open the vein in this manner. and if the vein is operated on and the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon be skilled in these matters.
And if the vein works the first time, that is good; If not, begin again slightly below or quickly above that vein, if the limb is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient feels better, let it be for one or two days, and do not apply a bandage: by chance abscesses may come out;
do not take a bath, then begin the treatment again if it pleases him;
and if the hole is small, or the wound is shallow, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then fill that hole itself with the flame directly.
and work a bit hastily, so that the joints swell; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swollen, do not re-open the wound, and place a bit of olive oil on it, for it lightens the body's blood and heals the oil that is in this joint.
and thus administer the oil in each wound that you treat for veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing makes the joint stiff and sore when it is placed on the joint. if the blood and pus are subtle when they are too thick.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when the incision of the vein is small that time, hasten and place above the spot a wet sponge soaked in water and salt with a bit of heat, and hold it for an hour;
and you must do this after the bleeding from the vein has ceased, and if it remains at the spot after a few days without any black or green discoloration, it will not harm him; and if you see, place above it some substance of aloe or myrrh soaked in cucumber, onion, or something similar.
And often an abscess and appearance arise in the tissue of the basilica:
Place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, this is the bad appearance. Hear that you should not apply anything of what we have said, for accidentally it could touch the artery.
but apply a dry plaster to harden the area, then continue treating with other remedies until it is healed.
And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it continue to drain until it turns red. and if you see it large, let it continue to drain until it becomes fine. and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs an extraction of blood, that we make the wound larger, and let the flamed be wide;
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him to be treated less and more often, and one should treat him by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this manner of treatment is safe from hemorrhage and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide treatments.
and for one whose body requires treatment, it is fitting to give soft bread with juice of pomegranates. if it is heated, draw off the blood three or four times. And if it has a cold complexion, eat moistened honey syrup before the meal, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if it swells on the side, after the discharge of much blood, it must inhale broth of flesh, and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
And if it sees fit to let the arm swell and be injured again, when it is weakened by great swelling, it must be allowed to swell little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
And whoever sees fit to let the arm swell after the first swelling, and if it has strong virtue, it must be allowed to swell for seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
And if one sees fit to be injured on another side, it must be injured on the second day or the third.
For it has much blood in the body which is now heated, and this causes fever; if it is necessary to draw off a large quantity, and enlarge the puncture so that it heals in the flesh; then when you satisfy all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on your pulse when it is healed, so that death does not occur in the flesh, and this happens often when the surgeons are negligent.
and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon it; nor if it is curved, that you stretch the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
but let it be until it heals a second time; or you prick it with the tip of the flame, until the blood from the wound has ceased to flow, and place a bit of cloth soaked in water on top and press gently upon it.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be, and do not compress it, until the abscess is relieved.
And if the need arises to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that very vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the head because it is composed.
And the method for this healing is that the patient places their hand in hot water until the fingers become red.
then bind moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through the middle, not wide nor long.
and let the punctures be wide, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, do not immerse the hand in hot water, for it should be used more in winter than in summer.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of the treatment of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
strain the hand, and immerse it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; and if the vein is crooked, and you can feel it completely, it should not cause any pain;
and do not apply it too strongly, for the nerve is closely beside all the flesh, and then place the hand in hot water, if the flesh is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have let the blood as much as it needs, put a cloth with oil and salt on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each arm.
The sickness in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse [likely referring to an abscess or similar condition], and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
The soul's health is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as liver diseases, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the old thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its vein is such that the patient should pour hot water on it and rub it over the vein until it swells, and tie it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there flows much lymph.
Clean the wound or larger wound, or at the ankle, where movement is needed.
And if you clean it at the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and clean it through as when cutting;
and let the flames anise.
And if the stone cannot come out, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if the cleaner needs it for the first time, reapply it in a slightly different place the second time, because the joints are salted.
do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other foot equally.
The loins of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its stone is worth for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his cleaning is that the patient enters or bathes in it, and four dozes are drawn above the ankle by twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
and if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and by passing through it; and cut it well that you can, for the liver is soft, and it is very difficult to grasp with hands.
and cut it well that you can, for the liver is soft, and it is very difficult to grasp with hands. And if you do not find it, heal any vein that opens or is on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then untie the ligature, and place cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
Suctions are made of horns, or of skin, or of glass;
and ventilation is performed according to two methods: or by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this ventilation which is performed without pricking is according to two methods: or it is done with all fire, or with fire.
and ventilation which is performed by pricking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely at the shoulder. and the other is placed at the neck. and two more at the sides of the neck. and the suction cup below the chin; and the suction cup between the shoulders; and the suction cup on the kidneys; and the suction cups placed in the arms; and the suction cups on the legs; and the suction cups on the ankles;
and the suction cup does not treat blood from major veins, but only from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not weaken one much, as we do with the treatment of a vein. and it should not be administered, nor with all fire or sense of heat, in any disease that comes from overfilling, until the whole body is emptied.
And if due to necessity of diseases we must bleed, or for custom, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between times.
for there are those who, when they need to bleed, feel pain in the head;
and for those who experience overfilling and redness in their face, and in their head, and darkness before their eyes;
and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are spitting blood; and if there are such who think, and see by signs blood, wounds, deaths, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is between the months, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The health of the muscles and aids to the fracture of the head ... that comes to them, and it is not right that this be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventosation is in the place of the health of the cephalic, and it is not right that those of cold complexion use it, or who have cholera, for it does them much harm.
and for this reason, it is not right that those who have cold diseases of the head use it.
And those who frequently draw blood thus become forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the cupping device a little more downward due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The ventosation applied to the neck is in place of the health of the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason, it is effective for narrowing the pit, and cutting into the channel of the brachial artery, and at once, and for replenishment.
and it should not be held too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
The windusations at the second ribs of the neck are for headaches, eye pain, migraines, strangles, and tooth root pains, and are placed in the location of the health of the basilica.
and it must be instructed to the patient that he should expose his hand when placing it, not compressing the artery and avoiding hemorrhages of blood.
The windusations below the chin are for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar ailments that affect the mouth. and it is in its place for the health of both sides.
The wind-vasations of the shoulders are for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
The opening of the costal veins is equivalent to that of three veins in the arm, as they drain blood from these large veins.
and instruct the healthy one not to cut too deeply, for the liver is naked of flesh and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass on the buttock is equivalent to hemorrhoids in the pelvis and diseases beneath. It should be large, made of iron, and well-sealed. and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break. and he makes great wounds.
The cups applied to the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective for old pains in the kidneys, marrows, and bladder, and reduce swellings;
and they are placed on the two ankles and on the two feet, and in any case they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many conditions.
The way to apply the cup is to first ensure it is vacuum-sealed and then attach it steadily. Place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the reddishness of the blood appears.
then apply heat, and replace the cups, and observe the arrangement of the body, for some have firm flesh, and clear pores: it is necessary to prick only once, and make wide wounds, but somewhat deep; and gently suction.
And if the abscess is large, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to dilate the way of the large blood.
And if the abscess is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time;
and when we wish to draw a little blood at a time, we prick only once. And if we wish to have much blood, we often begin;
And if the blood is thick, we pierce it often, and the ends must be that the veins are suddenly pierced, and it is necessary for those with thick skin and hard ones, and who have small pores, that you anoint the eyes of the suction cups with aperient and solutif oil. If it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is in winter, with mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or some similar one.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsamite oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the one being cured has flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mullein water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
And those who have much moisture, let them rise from almond, or mulberry water, or sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or from sacred water, or from decoction of angelica or chamomile, or other similar substances;
and it is not fitting to use a suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
and do not sleep after the suction treatment, and it is necessary that he be warmed when he is to be suctioned and when he is suctioned.
And watch that the one who is being cured is choleric, and if the blood is too cold and inflamed. and it is fitting that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with vinegar, and similar things. and eat little, and fat of castrated animals, and moist meats.
and eat little, and fat of castrated animals, and moist meats. And he who has cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and moderately fragrant wine between old and new, and eat little, and eat small and light birds and pigeons.
And on the day he will use the cupping method, he should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give some men either treacle or mace before or after the cupping, to comfort the principal limbs; And let them be given in small quantities, but it is not good that those who are hot should drink it.
The suction cups that are placed without causing injury are those placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and for gout, and on the belly and the mouth and the veins and the hip, because that limb does not suffer injury to the eyes, and one does not apply fire only to attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the nipples when the infant nurses.
to thin the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the mouth to alleviate the member;
and relieves the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, it relieves the abscess by its attractive virtue by chance, or removes the stone from its place;
and thus she does it when placed upon the liver and upon the bladder when there is retained windiness, and these cups are administered empty to suction only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
And let it be two inches in width and half a palm from the middle with a small perforation in between, as for threading a needle, and made of brass, so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb.
and in the middle have a cross piece of brass or iron to hold a candle, and let there be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the strength of those who use them.
because the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and different from thin ones compared to fat ones.
And one must place this suction cup on the same limb:
take the wax flange or linen, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is placed in the suction cup, so that the light be at the bottom of the suction cup and not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and let it be at the puncture as we have said, so that when one looks, if there is vapor, and remove the suction cup;
and apply the linen in the same way as before, and repeat often if you need to.
In the cupping applied to diseases of the spleen, for all acute conditions, there is no need for a needle or puncture, and it is not administered forcefully when it is full of fluid, and is placed on the limb only.
and this is the form:
Without needles they are not administered forcefully only in limbs where one cannot put cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. and on the bare charred areas, such as the elbows or knees, and other similar areas.
and the quality of the suckling is such that when you find without needles in soft clear fluid without damage, you should use them.
and they apply a nut in sweet water until they become softened and have nothing in their cores; and then use venous incision and suction cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place on the bruises;
and when they are full and fall, if it is possible to place a suction cup, then put one there, for this is not very effective afterward.
If not, lift the limb off the bed, then wash it very well, and then dry it.
and if the limb is too sore after removing the bruise, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it there, until the bruises are healed.
and if the wound is multiplied, put on broken glass, or garlic, and similar things, until it heals;
or you put on the wound half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry out at the wound, it will stop bleeding now;
and if you have more need of them, take other bandages.
And if the bandages do not want to stick, rub the wound with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the bandage sticks, and then place them on it. As soon as they smell the blood, they will dry out;
and when you see that they are渗出，你撒上一点捣碎的没药和盐，或灰烬，它们现在就会掉下来。
This begins the book of fractures These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear friend, that the remedies in this chapter, they did not see any of the ancient books, nor did anyone read a letter about them;
and for this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
and I know nothing of them, save through the knowledge in ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have mastered this knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the summary of our words and the chapters where the wise ones place their understanding, remaining on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twists or wrenching comes to someone, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the patient on both sides, if anything fails you, such as weakness of body, or illness, or old age; or where the limbs are either too warm, or too cold;
and should the limbs be cold, this means cold jousts, and meat of fowl and chervil, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of an abscess being hot, or spreading of matter in the limb;
if the patient recovers under his former treatment.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient meat that promotes rapid healing or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, peas, and fish, fresh eggs, and good wine, and similar things. And in the case of meat, it represents nourishment and more quickly heals the fractures.
And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be properly healed or set according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but if there is no care, reset the broken bone with large tendons that harden and join the limb together, until it enforces as it was before; and do not completely remove it from his work, and for this reason, he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
And know that the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter. And there are fractures that go lengthwise, and others that go across, just like the cuts of a pen for writing.
And there are fractures that go lengthwise, and others that go across, just like the cuts of a pen for writing. And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with a small crack.
And have his instrument for each manner, and his tool proper in the restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone is due to the twisting of the joint, and clearly appears by lifting, and resounds upon pressing with the hand.
and when there is no twisting and it does not resound upon tapping, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small breakage. If it does not suit you to move it by hand, then apply medicines that come after this, and then hold it delicately now.
And know that the break that goes in length, and are the two parts of the joint, you must now put them at equal points, so that abscesses may come to life.
and if abscesses come to head, let him leave it for some days until the abscesses are pacified.
then place it evenly on the skin where you can gently and cleanly, know that the restoration of the former is lighter than the restoration of that which has parts.
then hold it, as is fitting after this.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, support it from two sides, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two strings, or one string and your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the injured member are separated, you must reduce them by all means at their roots in the skin where you can, and guard that through your work no injury or pain come to the patient.
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if you think it is not properly aligned:
if it is set beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, nor press it as those who cause an abscess to come by their work with hot incision and contraction on the limb, as we have often wished.
And when the limb is in place, well restrain the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at its proper point, and one must place him in such a position that he feels no pain;
and ensure that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at its proper point, and one must place him in such a position that he feels no pain; and see to it that he is placed correctly, so that no twists remain when he is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Know that broken limbs are varied in smallness and in largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as fingers and toes: and it is fitting to wrap them in soft, fine linen cloth; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg:
If it is necessary to wrap in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bands encircle the entire large limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no shifting;
then tie with light bandages three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and restrain less, so that the break can move a little.
and gradually soften the bandage a little, until you reach a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and wrap it again around the broken area.
then go to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first paragraph above.
then place between the tied-off ligatures of linen or cloth, so that they be entirely equal, then tie all around the bandage, and then place your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on top something soothing for the abscess that reduces swelling, and let it be so for several days.
then place them over your dressings, and let them be of half the width of a large cut cane, or of wood used for splints, or of palm leaves, and let them be according to this shape:
but it must be that the dressing which one places over the fracture is somewhat larger and wider than the others.
and let it be as long as is fitting for the member's size or magnitude; then hold on the stileths as you did at the first hour, then tie above a suitable thread as in the first time over the breaster; tighter here, and less there;
and it must be that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of soft flax;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in works of those who make their hours from twisted flaxen cords, and that is a great error, for the thread cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two inches of space between each stileth.
And if the patient is injured by the shoulders of the needles after the tightening in their sound places, put over them lint or a cloth bandage so that it does not swell.
And when the wound is burned and the sinews are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
And know that it is not advisable to tightly bind the needles for all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to apply great strength for seven days or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring.
and see the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
and it is that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take З parts of bark and hand, 3 parts of eye and myrrh and gum arabic and mastic, mix X parts; myrrh and aloe, mix 5 parts; alcohol IX parts; and make it into a powder, and mix with honey of an egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this plaster, for it is a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many.
Another manner of plaster that is good for sprains: take mugat and vismalve, use X З.; myrrh and aloe, use 9 З.; camphor VI З.; bottlewort armenian X З., and grind well, and prepare with water or yolks of eggs, and administer.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their sockets, and alleviates the pain ensuing, and the cutting and breaking: take new wool, and the marrow in grease and cooked oil, and put it on the wound.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly removing pains.
Another way of plastering which heals broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, and ground them with terrestrial plantain leaves, and make a plaster from them.
Another plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of abscesses. Take root of violette, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each one part;
and grind them together, and compound with wine, and if the limb is heated, compound with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way to apply a plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess is hard and comes during the restoration of the limb. Take root of violette, and seed of flax, centaury, Melissa, and hyssop, and chamomile flowers, of each one part; and grind, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
And Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil does, and nothing else more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And Galen seems to suggest that one should apply on the broken limb things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plastering that is good for wounds and pain: take mustard and combed wool of sheep, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and salt, in equal parts, grind them, and make a plaster from it to apply to the place.
And then remove the plaster after some time, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place; if not, remove the plaster with your hands. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with restlessness or swelling, then hasten, and release it, and remove the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and soak it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed. then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure of the warm abscess.
and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain go away, then resume the fine binding, and a bit of plaster, but do not strain it so hard as before. and finely until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is empty and redness and pain and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need to apply a plaster and bandage, then proceed with it as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, or it does not dislocate after three days or four or five or seven. and even once let it be twenty days, according to what we see, until the fracture heals and brings the joint close to its place.
then apply more constraint than at first, and let it grow its flesh, as I have said before.
and if you see the limb dry more than necessary, know that no healing can occur. apply hot wet compresses, every time you dislocate it, and let the swelling subside a bit.
Through this work, cut the tendons in the limb, and quickly mend it as the wise fools do, that leave the limb deformed:
It is bad, and these works are full of fears, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it rightly.
Many kinds of fractures exist, with various forms, and the causes are predetermined.
because there are fractures caused by sword impact, and the gashes cut through the entire bone down to the marrow that is beneath the bone. and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "hache" (axe).
Or the spear pierces the bone from above without piercing it through, and is called this kind of fracture "absolute";
and these are the wounds from these two fractures, great or small.
And if there is a compression break, or a fracture of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar ones.
And if there is a break nearby, which approaches just to the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is located in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or some similar thing, and causes a piece of the bone to enter downward, and the swelling is as when blacksmiths strike on cauldrons. and if between the bones inside.
And this happens more to those who have or a head with moist bones, such as a child's head.
and happens in all these ways of breaking where small pieces are separated as splinters; and I will speak of it in its place.
And know all manners of breaks through their subtraction, and by inquiry with tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon them.
The appearance of the hair is known in this way: when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, black breaks appear.
In the treatment of the break, take heed of the bad symptoms in the patient, and if you see any ill symptoms such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, fainting, convulsions, fever, and the eyes turning outward and becoming red, and other similar things due to various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any terrifying symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the fractures come first to you, and it is in winter, then you must extract the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
And if it is in summer, you must hasten to extract the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone deteriorates, and the accidents as we have said occur.
And if the bone fracture comes as far as the cloth that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in such a manner:
and that you make an incision in the head of the patient's navr, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and more over the figure of the wound. And if a flow of blood comes to the exposure of the bone, or an abscess forms, then use the aid that is appropriate, and it is that you fill the head with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil. and let the wound rest until the abscesses subside, and you are assured of the cessation of bleeding; then begin beneath the bone to extract, and this is done according to two methods of work:
one method is that you make the incision narrow in front, and this is the form:
And then one cuts a larger incision than the first.
And the second method is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron.
and work lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is hard and strong, you must pierce it from below, as you make incisions with tenons, not perfectly but so that they do not penetrate beyond the base of the bone. The tip should have a margin or circle above it, so that the tip does not pass beyond the bone.
and you must have more than one, so that each comes to its place of the thickness of the bone, and that you have threads for all tests;
and this is the form of three kinds of threads:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one thread on the bone, and turn to your two assistants until you know that the bone is pierced.
then place the thread in another part a bit after, and do this all around. Cut out the space of the bone which is between the perforations more subtly than you can, gently as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps.
and beware that you do not touch the skull nor the face.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the displacement which has remained from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more precise and finer than the other incisor.
and if there remain no small bones or any scales, gently remove them with the instruments. then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galien said, which is simpler. and let it burn very strong, and this is its purpose. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lancet-shaped instrument the one described here in detail.
And do not cut entirely from one side, and let the part be divided into two halves, so that the incision is near the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly strikes the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath;
if it is close to the bone, gently remove it, for it can be removed with great harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then it must be treated by smoothing out that roughness, and removing scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, to apply in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you need to use large razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
In each of the other fine incisions and subtle breaks, you must act according to its direction;
and this is something that is not attributed to him who has dedicated his study to this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and apply it to the wound; then take another linen cloth doubled over two or three times, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so as not to weigh down the wound. Then apply the salve over the other cloth, and do not press it too hard so that it touches only the wound;
and let it be thus for one or two days, until the abscess is pacified, then release it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, and arsenic, and similar things;
and make powder of these things, apply it to the wound, and administer further medicines without causing irritation.
and ensure that the wound is thoroughly clean, neither leaving out the ointment nor allowing pus to form. For when pus forms on the brain tissue, it can flow and cause great harm to the patient.
for when you apply something caustic to the wound, nerves will not be able to withstand it. Therefore, take care, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt concerning it.
And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that has been placed on it, and it has such virtue, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in gum one wad, and apply it to the wound. then treat the wound as is proper until it is healed.
Know that either both parts of the neck above are broken, or one alone, for these are two bones.
and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not cause swelling or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your little finger or perforator of the neck, and set the break evenly within your index finger, and into the pocket to secure it, so that the neck regains its natural shape. and do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is above the nose and the fingers cannot reach the place, it must be that you set them evenly on the head of a needle somewhat large.
And if the injury is on two sides, do the other side as well, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is subsided, then apply to the head of the newborn cloths of linen, if the injury is in one part.
or you apply it to the other side, if the injury is there. and let the cloths be so large that they fill the newborn's pores.
And any restorer should melt the wicks in butter and change each day. It does not seem right that they should be made moist in the preparation of a hen's egg, and with flour powder. then leave the cast, while the bones are hard, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes use goose quills instead of casts, and if at the sore wrap a bandage, and keep the blistering tool handy, and blow on the patient from among them. or do as you see fit.
And if abscesses break during the work, apply a poultice or moist cotton in rose oil, or with a little balsam.
And if there are no abscesses, put an ointment on the wound, made of silk flour and incense powder, cooked with a hen's egg, then place light wads over it, and do not tie the bandage too tight.
and if the break in the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then close the wound, treating the injured flesh, and joining, as with plasters and ointments suitable for such.
and if there is no wound within the bone, treat the surface, and apply grains of colocynth until it is healed.
When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound open, and the break is only fissured, not broken into pieces like beams inside, one can recognize it lightly.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right side, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, place your index finger from the right hand on the break gently, and fix it with the other hand behind, and make it even.
And if the break in the jaw is separated into two parts, you should apply an extension to both parts, making them equal.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a rupture, strain them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place a dressing on the broken jaw and put a double bandage on it. And place on the dressing a large stiff piece of well-made cloth, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, and fasten it securely to the cheek. Instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
And if you see that the swelling changes, release it on the third day, and then reset what has changed. And apply a plaster with powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour, after you have removed the dressing.
and place a light cloth over the plaster, and if the plaster dries out, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it heals in three weeks.
And if a gangrenous abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of the bone has been removed; so subtle in removing with instruments appropriate for this.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flambes according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these fragments, and there remains none, close the wound if it is large, and apply plasters convenient for this, to promote healing until it is healed.
The shoulder fractures multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the fractures are according to three ways:
or it is fractured and dislocated in two parts, and there are pieces, making it the easiest to reset;
or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the procedure is when there is a fracture with a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the force of the broken bone; and the other extends the arm towards the proper position;
then place the fracture evenly in its proper position, so that it has neither appearance nor movement.
And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or wool over the shoulder on the patient. It should be as large as needed. and extend and hold the broken bone, securing the pad with your hand, so that you can place the fracture evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards, because it comes from below fully, then it is fitting that the patient lie often on his side, and place under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have the attendants press the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
And then treat the fracture with your two hands, and if you find any fragments, you must incise over it;
and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any protrusion, apply pressure with one of your incisors that you have. but place it over the fracture, to prevent displacement:
and it should resemble a spoon, and is not misplaced, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work;
and use two heads, as you can see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound you made when treating the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
And if abscesses come around, I wrap them in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
The compression of the bone, when it is painful and due to a cut, is that you apply on the bone a plaster made from mill dust and egg white, and place light stops over it, and put a sphere underneath, if you need it. then take a very wide bandage of about one palm in width, and place the cloth doubled over the stops, and apply the plaster. then take a strip about three digits wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang out. and place the stele on the blister, and turn the bandage around the neck, underneath the healthy axilla, and underneath the unhealthy axilla; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the blister properly, and clearly see that the stele does not move over the broken bone, then reward it daily, and when the ligatures are loosened, apply the restraint;
and have the patient lie on their back, and when they sleep, place a small pillow underneath the axilla to lift the shoulder upward; if the fracture of the scapula is realigned by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until no harmful accident occurs, for twenty days;
then resume the plastering, if you see that he needs it, and hold it steady until it is restored.
and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in fewer for some individuals.
of the breaking of the shoulder
Often it happens that the shoulder breaks or is damaged in the middle, and cannot be fixed without external application;
so adjust the joint according to the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
then apply on the shoulder powder from the mill with abundant egg, and light bandages, and place over a double cloth. then place a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are movements anywhere on the board, fill those areas with linen stoppers, so that the board dries evenly;
and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move in place, and check the knot each day;
and every time it dislocates, bind it again, and adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side.
and the shoulder is restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
And when these numbers are completed, release it, and be sure, because it is not bone that can set lightly.
And if a piece of the bone tends forward, and not over the heart, cut it out, and do as we have said in breaking the strong ligament to treat hot abscess.
of breaking the foot
The bones are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but they often break at the end.
And when it is broken in the middle, it bends to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and has difficulty walking. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movement in the broken bones becomes apparent, and everyone can see this well.
And the restoration is such that if the patient lies often on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly and evenly adjust all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
then apply plasters and poultices over the fine salt layer or other light substance, wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the thread round on the back, and hold it properly, and reward each hour the cloth, and if it loosens, hold it tight;
and if it is necessary to disengage it, due to corrosion or itching that comes there, or pain or abscess, hasten and disengage it, and apply a fresh poultice, and treat what has come in ways of treatments;
then apply the poultice again, and hold it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in those large ones behind the back and at the head inside, and they break only because they are fragile. and we feel well at the inquiry of the wound.
And the restoration is to place the break equally, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and bandage it with a cloth if you need to.
And if the fracture of the ribs is sinking inward, the patient feels great pain and spasm, similar to pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and they apply leeches, and immediately the patient vomits great quantities of blood, which is a serious illness, and the old method involved great skill.
And if some say that it is fitting to administer foods that swell the belly, to drive away the colic.
We do not make those who have not had an abscess come to one. And if they have had one, let them be cured.
And they say that we put cups on the side to suction strongly, and this seems reasonable; in any case, there is doubt that the cups will draw the excess fluids to the side due to the weakness in that area.
And if any of you say that we should cover the shoulder with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the duration equal, then it should be treated with the pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone where the ligament is torn, and doubt exists for the patient, it is necessary to incise over the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place something underneath the instrument to prevent leakage.
And then one must incise the bone, and gently extract it, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until he is healed.
And if abscesses continue to come, place moist cloths in rose oil, and apply them to the area.
And treat the area as needed for the abscess, and let it lie properly over the rib where it belongs until he is healed.
and also in the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be cured or not, observe whether their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is fatal in many respects, and if they can move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper care is given.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, observe if the flesh is softened, and if the symptoms are in the hands, and on the back, with sudden ventilation and involuntary evacuation.
and when it is felt on the abdomen, there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is sooted on its back and he wishes to heal, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: if not treated properly.
And if this does not happen to him, it is the lighter matter.
And the treatment is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply a rose oil or egg yolk oil until it subsides.
then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
And if any bone splits, it is necessary to bind it with a cloth. and remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with ointment promoting healing until it is healed.
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the humerus", you should hold your left hand's pouch and place it evenly in your right hand as much as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage over it if needed;
then hold it tight, and if there is exposed bone, incise and remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Then it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it has happened, there will be a slight alleviation at the head. and incise longwise, and incline towards the side, and causes pain at the site, as well as swelling of what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards, as long as you are above the burn. and know which are the breaks and their configuration;
and if the break is only in the head, set that break equally, as long as it remains in its natural position.
And if the break is along its length, or it inclines inward, you must lie the patient on their stomach so that the restoration of the fracture can be aligned. And when you have set it equally, apply a plaster, then place a wooden or copper splint on top, and bind the brace so that it does not move.
and place the head between the ribs, as long as it is in an equal position. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
And if abscesses form around it, do not touch them, until the abscesses are alleviated, and apply what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it ought to be, if there is no further bad accident;
of the shoulder dislocation
The auxiliary is that which is between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of the two methods.
of which one is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two heads with two ligatures, and pull them up, seating the patient on the seat;
then he places the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, with a crosspiece of wood in the middle, then pulls up any heavy thing or the attendants extend downward;
then place the broken part equally with his hands until the break returns as it should.
And the other method is that you place the patient on his back, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants such that one holds the part above the break with both hands, and the other holds the part below the link, extending each to their respective sections.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament below the break, and above the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you should place one end in the middle below the armpit, and the other towards the side, below the break;
and if the break is towards the side, you should place the end gently, without effort, until the break is equal over the bone and over the side;
then set the break equally as it should be, and hold it steady, if no abscesses are present.
And if abscesses are present, you should not hold it steady for more than seven days, and place wetted linen in oil and rose oil on the abscesses until they are calmed.
then he holds it in place, and the way to hold it in place is that you apply the plaster over the burn, then set the arm on the shoulder support, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the side.
and place the cloth, and hold it in place on the shoulder support, and on the arm, so that the arm remains straight, unless something prevents it or the bone is dislocated.
And if you doubt that the bone is dislocated, use a splint, and place over the break a wider and stronger splint than the others, with two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it spans the break by three fingers' width from each side.
then hold on the flasks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the breaker, stronger and less by removing.
And if you see the base of the flasks and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, you let it remain tied for seven days, as we have said.
then examine each of three days the healing, that itching or swelling not arise at the place, or the swellings not be able to come to the limb because it is too narrow. If the treatment, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not release the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his hands over his stomach.
and place over the shoulder joint a cloth well filled with evenly cut wool, and watch each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the tendons do not become softened.
if the remedy through the virtue of medicine, and give the meat that we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat be over the deepest veins; and when it begins to heal, let it be large.
And it is custom that the shoulder joint and the leg should be replaced after 40 days from then. and then one must release and administer baths and ointment medications to heal the limb.
And if the stricture is ugly and contracted, it must remain to be untied for one or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile" bone; one is small and is that which follows the pouchet.
and the other is large, and it is this one that is beneath, opposite the small bone.
by chance, the large foscile bone may be broken alone, or the small one, or both together.
When the small foscile bone is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large bone is broken, the healing is poor, and more severe than when they are broken together.
If it is the small fragile bone that is broken only, then it should be extended gently and placed evenly.
And if it is the large foscile bone, it should be held tighter during reduction.
and extend it over the chest, and hold the hand pouch higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient cross their hands on themselves, and the cushion in front higher, so that the patient does not suffer any discomfort.
then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or at the elbow, and others above the other ministers.
And then place the bones evenly, according to their best form.
And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its place. And if there is any detached part that cannot be grasped and restored to its place, cut it out, as we have said before.
And with the knife for wounds, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; if you take the treatment.
And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, cover the poultice with a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft. and bind I the cloth gently, until the abscesses are calmed.
And then remove the wick, and apply the plaster of the powder of the mill with abundant egg, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the burner be stronger, and a little wider than the others.
and know that it should have six bandages or arms in various arrangements: let the burner be in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold tighter above the burner than elsewhere, and always less by pulling away, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the wound be soft and moist, and not hard or harsh;
and let the cloths that are on the wound be soft and moist, and not hard or harsh; and let the threads, from which it is drawn, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the member and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary to rinse the limb with warm water until the itching is缓解。请继续翻译接下来的句子：Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;
and let the limb rest not too tightly.
And then reapply the binding. If the ligaments have softened and the bones displaced, address as necessary.
And if you notice that the swelling cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for a few days, until the swelling subsides, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not let him lie dislocated for up to twenty days.
or in case of need, then place his hands on his neck, and let his shoulders be level, and take care to prevent movement and displacement, and sleep on his back.
and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the mixtures and combinations of the virtues.
of the hand fracture
Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, there are few fractures, and there often comes much swelling.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it must be splinted and set straight in front of him equally;
then place his hand on the board stretched out, and have the attendant extend the broken bones, and set the joints equal, until they are well aligned;
and apply the plaster and wafers if no abscesses come, then place a bandage according to the size of the limb; and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the broken bone is in the upper part of the sole between the toes, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken sole; and then wrap it with a long bandage, and let the padding be of cloth as large as the palm of the hand, and wrap it as fits.
And if the fracture is in the foot, it is fitting that you place one istle above and another below on the sole, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the toes.
And if the broken bone comes to any of our ribs, if it is displaced, set it equal, as fits. and wrap it with the sole, and if you see that you place a small pad straight to lift the broken bone, and let it not move.
and if the fracture is on the other shoulder, as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and bind it with the healthy shoulder that is next. or you tie them all together, keeping them still, or you place a splint on it, as one would for a bag.
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and aid those who come, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and well one can see it when it turns front and back.
and the restoration is done by binding the ligament above the fracture, and the other below. And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends his limb equally.
and this is when the fracture has reached the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one bandage against the knife, and the other bandage below the break.
And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the limbs extend from the knee, and let there be downward extension;
then place the bone in its natural position with both hands, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, if no abscesses appear.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment. The healing is done in such a manner.
It is necessary that you wrap the burn with a cloth of hard double thickness two or three times, and let the surplus remain, then move the leg until the heels are at the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, behind the knee under, and the head of the thread above;
then wrap the leg and thigh with the cloth, place a strip over the burn, and put a strip on the bone of the leg;
then place eight strips of cloth around the leg and thigh to equalize the compression, then begin to bind in three or four turns around the burn. and as you go further from the burn, the binding should be less tight.
then examine the two heads of the thread that you have placed between the thigh and the knee, and in the third space above, then return above to the head of the thread, until you see from below.
and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there is no abscess or swelling or any other similar condition. and if it does occur, release it and apply what comes next as we have said many times;
and if there are bits of bone that protrude, you should sew them up if possible; and if it cannot be sewn, then you must cut the skin and extract the bone; and treat as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken when we insert needles, as in the shoulder and arm;
in every way, in the restoration done, the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or somewhat less or somewhat more, according to the多样性 of constitution。
Know that in the groove of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is not merely a crack or hole, but comes about from any wound, and feels like a deep wound.
And the restoration is such that we place what is warm on both sides, until it moves as much as possible.
then apply the plaster, and put a round needle if you need it, and hold it properly. Then restore all the arrangements as we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases. if you apply to each accident what it needs, until they are healed.
of the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" by straight naming, and the other is called "foscile".
and breaks in the same way as it happens in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is equally the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in every direction.
And if the fine bone is broken, then turn it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly. and turn around.
Then administer extension, and set it equal, and tie the straps equally;
but in any case, if the fracture is ugly, and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be less and more gentle; and adjust according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two bands of soft wood that fit around the leg on both sides, and let them be long from the middle of the thigh to below;
then wrap them with one band over and under, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well.
and none administer the bark of the long leg, and it is from the elm, and they place the leg to guard against movement, and properly done in the fracture where there is a wound;
and move the leg each day, to see if there is any new abscess or other accident; if the wound be healed.
of the fracture of the bones at the foot
A the foot no break comes, but in the bones of the foot a break comes sometimes and in the toes much more, and there is strength only with many conditions.
And if there is a fracture in the bone of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to go, and then put your foot on top of his, at the point where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their proper places;
then apply the plaster and ointments on top, and place under the foot a small board for two heads full, then bind to the foot appropriately, then having wrapped it with cloths around, and other things you need.
And when three days or four have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two broken, restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be a bit wider. Then place under the foot that board I mentioned, and bind it appropriately;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and let it be placed over the head of the table downward the abdomen of the foot, so that it touches well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said to other breakers, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it requires.
of the fracture of the bone at the hand
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit elevated, then incline her towards the back part, and she should be held from behind.
then fill the cavity of the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as it can hold.
then release the woman, and gradually raise her back, and then the cotton will come out as it reaches the entrance of the woman's nature, and the bone will return with the tissue.
and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, replace it, and thus for seven days or so. the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a bladder of berry, and tie a string to the end, and fill the entire bladder with nature. then blow into the string, inflating the bladder until it is full inside. the nature will cause the fracture to heal.
then fill it with cloth, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the shoulder in man or woman is broken, reset it thus as we have said for the bone of the hip.
and these broken parts nearby to him who puts his study and use thereon, and understand my book.
and the breaks signify in many dispositions the right way of restoration: understand it therefore.
In the vein, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the vein into it; then wrap it with cloth around, and let it be for three days or wrapped, and it will be quickly healed.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be healed now, as our treatments indicate.
And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then proceed to restore the damage at that same hour or on that day, unless an abscess develops.
And if an abscess develops, delay the restoration until the next new day, as long as the abscess is pacified. Do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause evil accidents to arise.
And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered shoulder, it is necessary to place it gently with your hands, extending it slightly.
And if you do not have the extension, make one with iron, which has seven or eight long prongs, and the width is according to the size of the wound. and because of this, it is necessary for the doctor to soak three or four [rags], according to what he may need in each treatment of a broken bone;
and let them be clean and slightly large, so they do not fold under compression on the limb during your work, and let them be tight in front, and large in the middle forward.
And it is called "palanche," which is why the curved heads should be placed on the head of the visible bone. and apply it once, until it returns, and let them be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use a piece of an appropriate instrument, or probe or needle, to your ability;
then reset what is stuck in the bone due to hardness and small cracks.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
If you do this until it is in its place, then moisten the dressing with wine tincture, and properly if it is so. and do not place any ointment or other thing on the wound that it may cause putrefaction and corruption.
then administer herbs when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage.
and many times the foolhardy have done so, and caused the patient to die or become corrupted at least once. and let the compresses be softer and more supple than other fractures.
And if the wound is deep or large, and you suspect that a bad accident may have occurred, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it should not be dressed with cloths. but envelop it internally, instead of cloths, with hard bandages, and secure them.
And when you see after one or two days the wound inking at the wound, remove what you have put on for all wine, and apply healing ointment for wounds, as tetralfarmacion and similar.
And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
And the limb must be aligned in such a manner that the wound heals smoothly and gently.
And if many days pass and the wound does not close further, know that there are small bone fragments, for which you must clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the shoulder, or any other form of corruption, it must be treated, according to what is stated in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or other similar large bones, do not set it, for many times death results, but leave it until it decays.
by chance it may fall after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you cannot, let it be.
Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, it is a sad sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it may not be able to make the limb perform its natural actions.
Therefore take care if the fracture is fresh: if you administer styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and other similar substances, so that you use any of these things, or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine, or with an abundance of egg, or with oil; and place them on the nose in stoppers, and hold well, and do not release with your hands for days.
and place them on the nose in stoppers, and hold well, and do not release with your hands for days. and then dislocate it again, and repeat with another, until the nodations are removed.
or hold well on a well-made piece of flannel. for the property of flannel is that it removes all swellings on the limbs.
and if the nodation has already turned hard like stone, and it needs to be removed, then apply a cloth above, and cut the excess away. or have it removed by any razor until it is removed, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the member which is weak after the siege
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate, of which one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of too great movements, or not at their proper time; or because there is little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and strengthen his body, until the blood increases in him. and give him a bath, and provide him with joy and pleasure.
then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment attracts to the large ulcer, and frequently wash it with hot water, until the ulcer heals. and returns to its natural form.
of the limb twisted after recovery When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function:
for do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
and these operations are blamed, and great harms arise, and sometimes death follows.
wholly, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it must be treated with hot water, or boiled soothing herbs such as leaves of vismarula, roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and apply a soothing plaster, as well made, and take the vismarula poultice, and cook it with gelatin fat or hemp oil, and apply it on;
or take fat figs, and grind them with colostrum, and similar medicines that quickly alleviate.
And sometimes the nodation is removed to be rubbed continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And move the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with a steelawl, then it must be filed up to the bone, using a fine incisor lightly. and apply caution and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to someone, it is fitting now to reset it without delay.
and if one delays, the eyes will swell, and by chance if they are reset with pins in place;
for it is not fitting that one moves it when it is swollen: many times it brings about spam and other pains;
in all cases, when this happens, make the patient lie down, then let them rest until all the abscesses are pacified;
then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it comes back to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder to the feet.
Often it happens that the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both sides occur according to two ways: or they are somewhat displaced from their sockets, and somewhat softened. or they are completely dislocated, hanging toward the ear, and saliva drips from his mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, enveloping his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to place through natural means.
And if it is complete and thorough, you must reset it quickly, without delay;
and in such a manner that the minister grasps the patient's head, and places his thumb or a cloth in the pocket of one hand at the root of the jaw dislocation in the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be held steady, to keep it even;
and instruct the patient to soften, his jawbones, and move them in all directions. And you place the joint evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is good, especially if it involves both jawbones together, apply hot and oily herbs, gently resetting them.
nor violently to reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well, soften it by applying moistened cloths made of rose oil and wax, then bind it loosely with soft bands.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two cushions, so that they do not move neither to the right nor to the left, nor attempt to move their necks, but give them light food until the pains are gone, and bind the jaws.
and then let him eat lightly, and do not trouble him to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaws are well bound and healthy.
And if the two mandible bones cannot be reset to place within an hour and are not fully returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffness become accustomed, and by chance there may be intestinal paralysis, and by chance vomiting of black bile.
And when you see this, know that it is fatal; and often the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate the lower rib within the continuation of the bone and is only dislocated once at the fracture, and one can feel this.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and stretches his arms; and then press the head firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and the bandage, and secure it;
and the shoulder that is near the cut cannot be reset; if it can, and if it is reset even once, then reset it to its place as we have said;
then apply the plaster and the bandage, secure it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
and in the same manner, the shoulder of the scapula is brought back when it is dislocated from its place;
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is not dislocated for three ways:
of which one is that it dislocates at the part of the neck on the outside; and the second is at the part of the shoulder blade; and by chance dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder, and does not dislocate within because of the nerves;
and often dislocates outward towards the neck, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it moves quickly;
For those who have enough flesh, make incisions, and缝合。 (Note: The last word "rentre a poines" does not have a direct English equivalent in this context and seems incomplete or incorrectly written. It might be intended to say "and close" or something similar.)
And by chance it happens to some men through a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
It must therefore be tested thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it moves downward towards the armpit, and place a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. and you will find a depression at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit at the axilla, as if it were a hollow. and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, though not hidden, for you will find it clearly by touch;
and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is new or when the person is sick.
And the method is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their fingers under the armpit, and resets the joint by gently lifting it upwards to its proper place. and the attendant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it under. if it comes quickly.
and if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the patient should be treated with soothing and relieving remedies, such as a decoction of almond tree, fenugreek, and marigold in water, and it should be applied.
then dress the patient's back, and place a cloth of medium consistency neither too soft nor too hard under the bandage. Then put the patient's foot on the cloth and tie the shoulder blade securely, and stretch the hand of the patient.
and secure the patient's head, so that it does not move downward. that shoulder dislocates again immediately, and if you reduce it according to this manner:
and you should have someone who is larger than the patient present; and stand upright facing the patient, and place the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pull the hand of the patient downward towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, he may add something heavy to him, and the dislocation will return now.
And you reduce it also in another manner:
and it is that you insert the long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be as round as a fist, and neither too large nor too small; then it should be placed over the patient, but let it have a hood covering its mouth, and the patient being long of the length of the staff;
then it should extend its hand downwards, and the joints will return to their place quickly;
and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then perform this treatment: take one stick of two arms' breadth and four fingers' width, which has a head rounded to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form:
then tie it over the head of the stick with a hood, so that the stick does not burn the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient;
and stretch out your arm above the pole of the long one, and tie the shoulder above the pole, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on the step of a ladder of width, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from another side. the jointure returns to its place now.
And when it is done, in whatever manner that may be, you must place under the armpit a pad of wool equal, then apply the plaster mixed with powder of grindstone, with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove the pad accordingly, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and wrap the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it must eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;
and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, it must be treated with three cauteries at intervals, as is described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joints do not hold, and cannot lift your arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. and know that the joints will never return to their proper place.
The dislocation that is in the buttocks, and the breasts, or rear, is caused by impact, and extension of hands, and is applied elsewhere.
and treat until he is healed.
And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and delay with movement, the patient should take bath many times until that pain subsides, and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
know that the joints of the elbow are dislocated at points, and return to their place at points.
and when it has lost its moisture from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, for it can be seen clearly and felt clearly; and has lost its moisture according to each figure. And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, you must see it clearly. And the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And you must reset it in the same manner as with abscesses that come to a head and heal, for if abscesses come to a head and heal, it would be harmful to bring them back.
and by chance it cannot be reset in every part, especially when it is at the rear. it is worse than other dislocations, and causes even greater pain, and by chance it may lead to death.
And the restoration is such, when it is thus that one can bring it back, that you extend its limb with your two hands; and its arms be spread out, and the hands placed according to the edges around, in front and behind, and place the joint at its socket or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes the root of the palm cut which is displaced.
And if it will not return to its place, apply strong extension;
and it is such that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with their hands, so that it does not move with the extension;
then turn the arm in both directions, after you have wrapped it in a long and wide double cloth;
and when the eye is placed over the joint to smooth the jointure, then apply the grease of any eye until the jointure returns;
and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg yolk, and hold the limb steady, and may the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and let it for some days, then release it.
And if the jointure is firm in its place, release the bandage, and let it.
and if you see that the jointure is not set well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and let it so for some days, until it is firmly placed. then untie it.
And if it feels painful after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press it until it subsides. or you place a piece of fatty sheep fat on the joint for one day and one night, then remove it, and let the area be immersed in water or a bath. and when it swells, rub the joint well, then place the fat piece on it again, and immerse it in water or a bath. and do this two or three times until it is healed.
and if you see, place moist heated sheep's fat with butter on it and press it in place.
if it returns to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The shoulder joint is particularly dislocated, and the return is light, more so than other joints. In all cases, it must be reset quickly to its proper place as soon as it is dislocated, whether the joint is swollen or an abscess has formed.
And the resetting is done by placing the injured hand on a table, extending the minister's hand, and setting the patient's palm over the location of the joint. Hold it until it returns to place.
In all cases, you must ensure that it is properly aligned; then place the patient's hand side down on a table for stretching and realignment. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and the attendant place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is well. If not, apply plaster to incise and drain the abscess, and let it be so until it can resume.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will remain misaligned.
and it will not harm the patient as long as the hand remains soft, and cannot grip anything at all. then you will know that the nerve is cut, or the artery.
if there is no other means to treat it, by chance nothing else works.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is any swelling, apply hot liquid grease and rub it until it heals.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist;
then reset the fingers, and hold them with your hands until they return to place, then support the hand of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for two days, and then set it straight on the second day;
and do not bind it, as we have said, and release it each day, and allow it to move, and bind it at night;
and do this often, until it is tight, and likewise do so, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is healed;
and likewise do so, if it is dislocated in another place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no point in treating it, as death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the vomit leaps without will, nor can it be held back, and often a limb becomes softened, or both thighs or both arms.
And often the spine moves in four parts;
that which moves at the rear is called "gilbositez":
the treatment is such that you should remedy if the yellowishness has come from childhood: if there be no cure or healing for it.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say that it does not bring great profit to all.
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the yellowishness that comes to the foot, there is no remedy or healing;
and likewise that which comes directly to the two sides, and can only be cured by that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient be extended on his back with the limb in an even position, and have a cloth beneath him, so he does not swell;
then stick a hot poker into the buttocks and the other at the feet, and tie a bandage under the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and the knees, and the ankles;
and two ministers know the bands, one at the buttocks and the other at the feet, among the two pokers;
and let them be well closed, the poker as we have said, and the minister place his palms on the buttocks firmly, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three ells long, and lay it under the wall, and if the patient is on his side, place the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine; and place the patient's feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to place;
and if you see, do it at the joint that turns by hand. And when you stick two hot coals at the head of the patient's arm from one side, and near the feet with the other, place half a palm length of long pepper between each coal.
and have in each coal hole either the pointed stick or the stake, and let the coals be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move;
and between each two coals have one turning coal, upon which the irons turn, and have in two turning stakes small coals of a palm's length, to turn the stake;
and then bind the iron between the cheeks to the stake facing the head, and the other iron away from the feet to the other stake, and each minister turns his stake with all the iron, and the master place the spike evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, place a drying plaster with abundant egg, and then the stoppers, and then the stake of a piece of three palms long, that pierced the vein of the fatness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with an iron as we have said, and use the patient for subtle healing until he is cured.
and if any matter comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and relaxing medicines, with the dosage that we have said above; and sometimes a piece of flax is administered, and sometimes there appears an appearance in the lower spine of the back, and one should take care that it be dislocation. and it is the bone that protrudes, for which one must not have presumption: by chance it would bring about death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, and do not occur in the same way as other joints.
and the joints of the hip are dislocated according to four parts: dorsally and ventrally, and in front and behind;
and more dorsally it is dislocated, and only slightly dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of a dislocation dorsally is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee is more open than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend as far as the healthy one. and it is the muscle that is affected and swollen from an abscess of heat, because the head of the thigh bone comes into play.
And the sign of him to whom it happens is that these accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.
And the signs of him who is in front, are that his leg is well according to fulfillment; In any case, do not bend the knee in pain, and if one tries to make it move, it cannot, and it retains its urine, and swells the ankles, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him to whom these happen later are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the site below the ribs.
The remedy for this case of dislocation is that you reset it if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, then there is no need for further treatment. and it should not have any presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must hurry to reset the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. If it returns to its place, it has no need of further treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary to prepare the minister well, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or at the part that is tied above the knee. and have another minister extend his hand above in such a manner that he places his hands under the armpits, then bind it with a cloth around the thigh; and another hold the head of the patient.
and extend upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This method of extension is common for the four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it must be treated for its likeness.
When dislocation is at the shoulder blade, you must stabilize the patient on the healthy side, then place the ligament at the root of the thigh, and below the angle, then tie it above towards the angle and away from the spine.
then bind the other minister's arm, and embrace the large ligament of the injured thigh, and extend it downward firmly. it will now return to its place.
and this method of dislocation is less severe than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong ligature above the ankles and knees, and ensure that the injured leg is extended about two fingers' breadth more than the other.
then let it hang from the head of a stake, and two arms length.
then command the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let others hang with the patient who embraces firmly the thigh, for the joint returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is downward, the patient lies down, as we have said in that concerning gilbositeit, and draw the ligament on the injured leg properly, and on the heel also.
then place two hot coals, one on the head and the other on the heel, then insert the coal between the thighs of the patient in the proper position. and plant dry cloths between, so that it does not blister the patient, then stretch each minister before him, and align the eyes with his hand at the dislocation.
And if it returns, that is good.
And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the good side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the eyes where the pain is on the injured leg, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward toward the knee.
And when the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to stretch the injured part downward or lift it off the ground. Instead, it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated behind, as we have said regarding the position on the two hips. and it should be above its surface, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and must be pressed on the joint at the table; and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage, so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then remove the bandage, and apply the plaster again;
and if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and let it rest for 3 days;
then release the ligature, and let it go freely until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: it is to say, within and without, and behind;
and does not dislocate at the front.
And the sign is this: you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not fit against the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you instruct the patient to sit straight, and extend their leg if possible, and place your back against theirs, and put their foot on your feet;
then take his knee with your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee apart; and extend his foot further, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he moves his leg lightly with his thigh.
and apply the poultice, and keep the leg elevated at the thigh, and bind them tightly for three or four days, then release the binding.
and do not allow the patient to walk much until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The ankle is sometimes injured, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment is light, and one should gently extend it with his hands when he is merely suspected.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must seat the patient upright, and hold him by the ministers [slaves or attendants] except by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upward, and firmly place the foot upward;
and do this twice as we have said, by firmly placing and drawing the foot;
if it returns, that is well;
if this does not work, restart the operation, for it returns;
and if it cannot return this way, place the patient on their back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around, so that the patient does not move.
then hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot to the hand or the ligature, and tie it around the neck of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and the stakes be placed firmly between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while extending.
then place the shoulder in an even position at its sides, and another minister hold the healthy leg from above, and the dislocation will quickly return to place.
And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and plugs over it, stretch the skin, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle so that the bands are not too tight;
then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and as the bands soften, stretch them;
then release it on the third day or fourth, and instruct the patient not to move for 4 days; and if it goes beyond this time, it is not certainty that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses arise, you must relieve them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
of the two When they are dislocated, you must beautifully extend them with effort, and this is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the foot or ankle, it is necessary to seat the patient on a firm surface or on a bench completely upright, and place his foot on what protrudes from these joints, then stretch his foot well until it returns.
and when they are equal, and there is nothing apparent, put under the sole of the foot a shoulder blade for two shoulders, then hold it firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one sees it healing, many times the patient dies:
if you are not overly presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not always patient and merciful and not too bold;
and use at the beginning of things to cool an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, as the abscesses come to life.
and when the limb is in place, administer things to appease the abscess with heat, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments.
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and broken bones, set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
and guard against entering a state of fear, as I have said, for it will affect you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your weapon and body.
