You, three heads of the son, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and have finished for its exposures and by its declarations. And I have seen come to me in vision that I have completed this with this cauterization, which is from the work of hands, it is to know "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is disfigured in every way, if it is perceived by the science and obscure, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this comes the error and emptiness, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
It seems that I believe that I could revive it by putting the arrangement of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation together. and come together the forms of the firebrand cauteries and other tools of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as he is skilled.
And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated. And it is necessary for him who enters this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of parts, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and limbs and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the legs, and also of their issue.
And because Ypocras says that with the non it is not made, and with the work it is few. and similarly in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that those who are not known of things before said, if it is made that he does not err and does not mislead the men.
1. If I have wanted many times of these who become involved in this science and if they abandon this science and senselessness.
1. For I see a man who has his head covered with scabs or the neck of a woman, and covers the arteries of the neck. 1. because so much blood is lost that the woman dies in her hands.
1. And see another man who treats a wound of an old man, and the wound was large. 1. If he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and he died the third hour.
I have already been accused of the practice, and see the position of the patient and the size of the piercing, and if it was well that it was cut, then it died.
And see if another man who had been in our kingdom who had broken his leg, and with the fracture there was a wound.
and the men of ignorance were restrained from the fracture on the wound, which was done in short time, and did not leave any pain in the wound, and it was finished.
and the command that it does not slip away.
and waited until the leg was completely frozen and the foot, it came to ruin.
I was called for to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg. When I dislocate it, if it is not in the body and does not feel any pain.
But all paths to cure the corrupt or injured member were already known, but it was not effective.
And the corruption did not stop until the member was completely wasted and the member was lost.
And see another wonder that will fall and enchantment, and then inflame by the evil of his lordship.
For chancre, when it is free of melancholic matter, only then does it happen that if one touches it with iron, it will not be able to do anything else than what is corrupted.
And therefore, unskilled children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts. It is to know, coward or there is more danger in other positions.
And I will show in every joint of this book where there is danger and fear.
For if you do not keep them well, then they will not be able to speak well of you.
If you take your weapons in good order, and handle your patients lightly but firmly, and use the best way possible if by God's grace you come to health and be well.
and let the unwholesome diseases of sorrow be healed.
and keep your weapons in good order, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galen's admonitions are not without fault. Do not take medicine for a serious illness unless you are called by a wise man.
I have seen this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet.
and of the forms of stitches, and of the materials for cauterization, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and pricking, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
and it is ordered and the forms of stitches.
The third chapter is for restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and it is ordered according to the loosened joints and the shapes of the muscles.
However, if we remember the work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the help and not every complexion.
I say that the quality of help, and not harm, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and the secret remedy.
and they said more of the sausages, and they agreed to this.
and they say less of their words, because I question their age.
I say that cauterization helps universally to all complexions or matter, for it is the complexion. This is to know the complexion of heat and the complexion of dryness.
In heat and dryness, combined with matter, they devise no and say that the cauterization is large aid. and the other says the opposite: that cauterization is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of hot fire is heat, and it should not be treated with hot disease by heat, nor by dryness.
and those who say the opposite that cauterization gives great aid to hot disease that comes from the courage of men. For as soon as you perceive the chest of the patient and its moisture at the complexion of hot fire, you must quickly close the chest.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found it at any time by experience.
And all paths, no one interferes as much as he who has experienced it, and knows through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes for their diseases, and their symptoms and the spaciousness of tendons.
Other complexions have no pain, just as in cold and wet diseases. The patient should assemble and align with the fire cautery.
Understand, children, that the fire cautery assembles when it has secretions of remedies, and even more benefit than the cautery of burning medicine.
For the flesh is simple, and only causes harm to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members.
The hot medicines come from one part of the body to another, by allaying, and bring health to the afflicted parts. and by chance the patient is found.
I made this remedy and its goodness for the substance does not lack, if it has no surplus.
And I found this in my research through experiment and the length of service and study I have dedicated to this art, and it is true of things.
And I apologize for the length of my speech, as I only share with you what I have learned and the quality of the work, how it affects the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. or receive them in your thoughts.
2. And know, son, that the cauteries should be made in such a way that they fit well, and they should be prepared.
And I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the wounds are not always misplaced by the help of cauterization. And likewise, if the cauterization is done for necessary pain and haste that cannot wait for the greatest malice to come to the member.
And do not think otherwise, you foolish man, if they do it like this. For the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return. And he says thusly.
And he says thusly. But it is not so with those who do it, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and is worthy of medicine for its swift valor, and for its virtue in its work and signory.
And some things are that the disease grows once according to the complexion of the patient and the weakness of the body and its virtue.
And the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not cauterized administered to him or he has little superfluity and moisture, like cauteries of thorns for pain, and similar things, and part of the pain does not return much. But this is rare.
And many people do not understand this because cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true.
1. But they only believe that cauterization is useless after medicine, but they understand it is false, and it is cauterization after medicine because when we manage any cures in no disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cauterization, and it is valuable.
Therefore, it is well said that cauterization is the end of medicine, not according to the attention of the gullible.
1. The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are as poisonous as those made of iron, and they did not know that it is because of the quality of the gold and the high nature of its substance.
1. And they said that gold cauterization does not cause any harm, but it is false to see it as such, because I have experienced it and found that it is seen in no man.
And the gold cautery is worth as much as the iron one, if they say so. And you know that the instrument is made of gold when it is heated by the color of the gold, and has cooled down.
and if it is heated too much. If they do on fire. and it has enough prevention.
Or you have ordered this chapter of the lighter bones, because it is easier to find.
This cauterization is used for moisture and coldness in the head, and it is done due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the ears, eyes, and jaw, as well as numerous dreams and pain in the throat and chest, and even for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and seizures, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient must be purged by medicine solutive modifying the chief III nuis or IIII, according to which virtue and age and accustomary of the patient he can suffer. Then I will cut the patient's head.
Then I will set the patient's head between my hands, and place my hands on their shoulders.
After, place the root of your palm on the root of their nail between their two fingers. And if your two hands come together, it will bleed, so wash the fire cautery which is called "olivare", which is shaped like this: And place it on the arm signet of ink, and pull and stretch your hand a little at a time, torn. Then gently loosen your hand element, and you will see the first bone is very small. and if you do not see it, when the cauterization resumes as soon as you see the bone, just like I showed you.
after pulling on the thread, and putting on soft cotton, and putting it on the knee, and leaving it for three days.
after putting on more soft cotton in the burr. and leave it until the burn is healed. after treating the wound with the ointment called "Tetrafarmacone", as long as it is healthy.
And if they say to the old man, that the more stretched out the wound is, the better it will heal. For this reason, it is helpful to help.
And none of these say that the fire cautery should be so harsh as to take part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and treat it.
And it is said that one must cauterize as long as possible, and drive it in as hard as possible, because the bone is so large and thin like the vertebrae that women use for the same reason that the humors exit outside.
And one must leave the wound long overstretched. After, one must cure and soothe it.
These two methods of cauterization seem to me to be the most effective in general, rather than in any man who has no fear.
And it seems to me that I should leave it alone.
Car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees "cochie", et d'espurgement de chief et d'oiles et d'emplastres. When you perform the fire cautery as we have described earlier, it is not effective. If the patient's disease is very severe and not too cold. However, the fire cautery does not work as we have described earlier. After performing the fire cautery on each of the patient's nails, as we have described earlier, and then perform the fire cautery on the joints called "vasses". and they are then placed in a vacuum. and make your hand as smooth as possible if you do not see the bone. The patient feels too much pain in this cauterization compared to others, and I will speak further.
It is necessary that the cauterization points be more sensitive than those used for circumcision, and this is the form:
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and When a part of the penis suddenly causes pain, and it spreads throughout the disease, and the patient is purged with medicines modified, and the other cures have been done as I mentioned in the division of diseases, but all of this does not help: Therefore, I perform cauterization in two ways, which is to say, with medicinal fire and with iron:
The first sentence to translate: "The medical cauterization is used if you have a wound that has not healed for a week, and the edges are black and charred, and then they make a temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the dose of ointment on the leather;".
And when it is reapplied, if the lip and the eye are tightened and left for twelve hours. And then the dressing is removed and the ointment is applied, leaving the wound for two or three days. Then the wound is covered with a piece of cloth that is dipped in beer as much as possible, until it is saturated.
After the treatment of inflammation when it is healthy.
and if you see that I have written any of these burning medicines or treated with other burning medicines.
The fire cautery if it follows this method. Heat the cautery of copper, and its form is:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cage or has a small opening, and in its environment it has a small appearance.
And place it on the painful shoulder, and hold your hand and gently pull the hair a little, as long as you do not feel any pain.
And gently hold your hand that does not burn, that is cold, and there is abundance of blood.
After putting on a piece of cloth made of hemp, and putting the limb in a splint for three days. Then I put on a piece of woolen bandage, and then treat the limb with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
And if you return to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cut the artery in this wound that is not yet anchored.
of the wound
When you treat the wound as we have described in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before dispensing medicine and hot iron does not benefit it, therefore it is necessary to use the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" as soon as it is white.
And keep your hand steady on the limb that is causing pain, and apply pressure with your hand once, and hold tight so as not to compress the artery and cause it to move away from the bone.
And close the mouth that moves when biting, and the teeth only move when chewing, and apply pressure to the dislocation of the artery when it is compressed, or when it is compressed, there is great pain and at the same time for those who do not know, and who are not studied or experienced. And leave the wound in its place.
1. But I tell you how to remove blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
If you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the affected area as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned or in the chapter on extracting an artery, with the cauterization instrument that has two cuts. And this cauterization is better than the one we have mentioned and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from being cold
When pain comes to the ear from coldness, and it is treated with soluble medicines and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not stop, then shave this cauterization which is called "points", and its form is:
After stretching the entire ear of the suffering patient, or if the pain is held in the ambitious part, and you draw a small piece from the root of the ear because you have felt the ear lobe swell. and at each point of each ear;
after curing the shoulder as much as it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
Torment that must be treated by cauterization is those that move due to fleas, as we have said in divisions of the disease.
and do not make cauterization as seems come from scratching and spasm of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torment that moves due to fleas and excretions of the head and throat, and it does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with the third cauterization. A part of it is at the root of the ear, another one is a hole in the temple, and the third one is in the adjustment of the two lips.
And places the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and makes the cauterization at the tip of the ear, where a hole is made in the earhole, and another one in the temple similarly like a punch; And leaves the cauterization as long as it does not hurt too much, whether on one side or the other;
And this is the form of the cauterization:
And it is the appearance of the cauterization that we have shown before, but it is a more delicate hole and it should be a larger one;
After curing the shoulder as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient does not have fever, then I made four cauterizations. I examine the two horns of the head, and remove the head, and then I cut off the leg which is called "vaginals" as we have said before, and the shoulder is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach.
And treat it as we have said before.
1. The patient should allow their hair to grow
In this disease, it is necessary to give the patient years of large doses and modified mental pills.
After the physician has examined the patient thoroughly, and places the scalpel at the occipital region of the emplastre of snail shells, which is written or treated with plasters.
and this is the manner of cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
If it is healthy, it will be better; And if it is not healthy, you should do three cauterizations of the head as you descend down the neck, and there should be space between each of the larger ones.
And the treatment is as with the others, and if you see him suffering, and the patient is in pain, you should do one cauterization in a hour. and the rest of the work is, II other at the II corners, and the care as long as it is healthy.
and if it is the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be washed with years and with what we have said before.
after the head is washed by the physician, then he performs the cautery on the head and at each corner, and the belly and three at the spine.
and if you have more skill, and the body is wet and the physician is fainting, and the disease is worse, then perform four cauteries on the spine. and he lets it as long as the more pain he endures, and hold his hand gently. after the cure when he is healthy, and that which is called "olive" the cauterization we have mentioned before.
The first sentence to translate is "de l’epilempsie". The
Epilepsy should not be used for cauterization except by those who are skilled, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
And if it is children who cannot endure it, I make a gargle and mastication, often changing the brain with raw meat.
after he has been in his environment for a while, and I make the cauterization according to what we have mentioned before, and I cauterize on the vein, and on each corner. and if the patient is weak and suffers, I make the cauterization as I have said for the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corsets, on the spine of the back and collarbone, and that which is called "olive" according to the way I have mentioned.
If the patient is ready, I will perform the fire cautery according to this method:
If the cause of melancholy is the excess or corrupt and fleshy moisture, then the fire cautery should be applied to parts as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is the declining superfluity becoming melancholy, and the heart is moist and full, then it should be allowed to drink something according to what the brain is ready for in the division.
After the chief of the physician; after making a well-made gauze, so as to wrap it around, if the chief puts it on;
and if the physician believes, and it should be held well by all parts;
after applying the ointment, and it is good to use old honey; and the physician heats the fire cautery, so that he can drink it and it will not harm; after removing the gauze from the physician's hand, and it is left cool;
and do this once a week with another medicine, as long as it is healthy.
If you see it being burned, make multiple holes in it before using the cauterizing tool.
This is the way to moisten the skull evenly.
And then put soft, greased cloth in the burr and on the linen.
of the hair of the eyebrows. When hair first comes out of the eyebrows according to the signs I mentioned earlier, then begin and do this: wash the tool with soap and clean it thoroughly, and wash all moist things more than once.
After he commands to shave his head, and I make the scalp cauterize, and I cauterize on both temples where the hair ends, or if it ends in one, then;
and cover all the cauterization veins and arteries that are exposed due to the hair, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
and cover it with a poultice of sand, and if too much blood comes out, if it is too poor for you;
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cauterization that you have mentioned.
and never has it been done to cauterize or burn off the two bones of the heel.
and we see that it is a cold and unwanted growth, therefore I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the descent of the hair; I cauterize my head, and you cauterize on the two temples, and you cauterize to burn off the two bones. If it is further refined, if the cauterization is gentle with the scorching of the hair on every small burn.
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore, he should drink mild milk; After the head is removed, and I make a cauterization or a gentle olive oil cauterization. and make two gentle cauterizations called "clavilis" on the two scars, a little apart from the hair.
and protect yourself from the artery that you do not cover.
And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then do the cauterization with this cauterization called "olivare". 1. If a dislocation occurs due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay
And if you see how I make the two cauterizations on the two horns as the rabbits are;
and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
The first sentence to translate is "dou poil qui point l'oil". The translation is No time has ever come when the hair of the rabbits is converted into wool, and they are shorn, and it is then cauterized according to these methods: This is to know by fire, or by burning medicine.
Or, the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then place the patient in your bed. After examining the hair, make a figure that is similar to the full thickness, and make a beginning of a sign of the wounds of the hairs.
Then I put finely ground cotton in the oil of olive and musk, then wash the cauterization with what is here its form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have made a few times and it is at the right place, make sure the hairs are in their place.
The signs of health are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise at the oil point.
Then gently hold your hand, and leave it for three days, then put cotton wool on the burn as long as the heat is intense. after the treatment of the burn once it is healthy.
And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same place, as you have done before.
And if the hairs are raised, then cauterize as much as the paper is lifted to its natural point, and it should be even, and do not prick the hairs with the oil.
The medical cauterization is that which you instruct the patient to leave the hair as long and even as possible, then make a piece of cloth in the shape of the iron plate.
Then use French soap and live salt, one for each, and mix them well together. And then apply it as best you can, if it does not cool, then scrape off the shape that you made with the iron plate and put on the paper of the eyes. And if the disease holds in only one ointment, then it is over with one, and it will be cured. and put soft oily powder in the wound's mouth.
and the patient's shoulder is in your hand and you place the scalpel on the medicine, and press gently and often, until the shoulder feels bitterness from the medicine, because it feels bitterness as well as heat.
When you have this done for a long time, if the medicine does not help you. And when the bitterness is passed, if you lift the hand, and see that the paper is raised as well as if it had been raised by tightening with heat or incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
If not, then apply more medicine on the hand or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your application is even, and your eyes are in line;
Then put fine wool on the wound as much as it is needed, after cleaning the limb with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
If you have the skill to well sharpen your blade for your work with great care, so that it does not cut the medicine.
And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair pricks in the oil, then restart the medicine on that limb which has become soft from the proper paper, just as you have done before; after the treatment as long as it is healthy;
and this is the form of the doughy pimple:
And these are the shapes that men's members can be large or small, according to your constraints.
and do not reply to the right side to the one who studies this art.
Translation: "Of the cure of fistula by cauterization
Translation: "When you treat fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work well, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in the correct position. And mark the midpoint of the patient's head between your hands in a certain way so that it does not move or change its position.
After, place woolen lint in the corner of the eye or in the juice of persillon on oil.
After heating the fire cautery that is divided:
And it should be chewed at the head like a quill of a feather, assemble the one that is the fire cautery.
If you see, if it is appointed for the one to the other, and if you see, if it is as if a tent;
But this which is your choice is worth more to your will.
After pressing the fistula it swells, and in turning the pus, and drying it; and it is closed, if the hand, and turning the belly is stronger;
after putting the fire cautery in place, and holding your hand on the fire cautery at the part where it is not smooth, so that your hands do not go mad; and puts the cauterization in the grease of the oil, and corrupts it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery before the bone, it would be better. If this does not work, then reapply the cauterization once more, and if you are skilled enough, and leave it for three days.
After this, I put on a soft cotton cloth on the wound, and apply the drying ointment as soon as it is clean, and if in four days it is still clean, then I apply an aggressive corrosive medicine as soon as the bone is exposed. and I follow according to what comes in my chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones mentioned. Open the fistula, and cut the leg. After putting the patient under anesthesia, the subtle form of the operation is performed on them. and they make the incision to the depth of a .З. of flesh. and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the patient at all, until the incisions have healed to their place.
and it is necessary to put on the patient a soft, absorbent cloth, such as a bandage or gauze.
The incisions should be cleaned with soap and water for the health of the patient.
If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it is good. If not, then administer the purging of the belly and return the fistula to its proper place according to what is best for the patient's own belly.
gums in the mouth Gums in the mouth sometimes come and are called "hair," and also in the mouths of children.
When you treat these gums as we have described in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
And it should be placed in those cracks as soon as possible.
After the wound is cured, as soon as it is healthy.
When abscess appears in the root of the gallbladder or uterus, or tooth, or roots of teeth, after purging and rubbing and it becomes watery and forms a fistula. And you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit much. Therefore, you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula. After the bite or rupture of the fistula, and hold your hand as long as the wound does not stop bleeding from it, and if it goes through.
and make sure once or twice to do it, after we have cured what we have said in the cures, as soon as it is healthy.
and if it is cured once or twice, it is good. and if not, then you must discover the bone and open the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
When the knees are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and it does not work, then put the head of the bad doctor in your head. after shaving the cauterization that was made, in a way similar to putting a collar around the tooth.
The patient is instructed to apply the fire cautery with caution, holding their hand firmly so that the sharp pain at the root of the tooth does not cause discomfort.
After gently releasing your hand, continue the fire cautery according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with salty water and letting it sit for an hour, rinse it out thoroughly.
And in a similar manner, if the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum is softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried out and becomes dry.
of the pain of the teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or it is cold, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to try the fire cautery in two ways: and by burning cautery and by fire cautery.
If the fire cautery is such that you can ignite wool, and the end in a iron or copper mold. After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent stake, and building a flame with wool, and placing the tooth on the hot end and holding until it cools down.
And often until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton burn quickly, and place the tooth on fire and hold it as long as the flame reaches the end of the tooth.
The fire cautery is used together with fire if it can ignite a piece of iron or copper, and it should be large enough that the flame does not reach the mouth of the patient.
After heating the cauterization, if it forms thereafter, and places it on the tooth and holds your hand until it is cooled down.
Do this often, as the pain will be relieved either immediately or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with hot butter in the pressure of this cauterization, and then it will heal.
And this is the form of the cauterization:
And make the cauterization according to what you want and according to what you have.
And this is the form of the catheter:
Of scrofuly (a term used to refer to When the scrophules are dry and cold, and are not obeying digestion by medicines, therefore wash the fire cautery with soap after it comes out, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery.
and put the fire cautery on top of the abscess once, or as it comes out from the abscess's opening;
and if the abscess is small, then put the fire cautery according to the amount of the abscess and leave it on for three days; and use a soft cloth to apply the cautery as long as the burn is not healed;
After healing the wound with ointments and bandages as much as possible.
When moisture reaches the cold pores, and at the same time when cold complexion comes, it is necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines.
After the burn at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn it too much but just a little.
After the other burn at the joint of the sharp point of the spine, and it is called "clavicle" in our form.
And treat the joint as we have described when it is healthy.
When all and disease of the lungs are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and is not sweating, and it is a chronic disease, then cauterize with the force you wish to use. and I another cauterize between the two hairs.
and the cauterization called "clavicle" according to the form that was mentioned earlier.
And if you see, cauterize by pricking at the entire cauterization called "points" of which the form is before in the disease of the ears.
And let the points be such as to hold the joint tightly, or otherwise loosen.
After the wound is treated according to the method described above, and if the cauterization is done as follows in this form:
Then the cauterizations are lighter because you are doing it with three points.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After which, the patient should have the physician examine his back and chest. After which, the knot that has been tightened should be loosened with your left hand.
And if the dislocation is repeated due to moisture, then the fire cautery that has been used should be washed with this form:
And cauterize the knee as much as it penetrates the chest, and the fire cautery will be used in four places.
And this is made with the fire cautery that has three needles, because the form of cauterization consists of six cauterizations.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the third type of cauterization that has:
And never has it been adjusted on this wound because it has eight cauters:
After putting on the cauterization, apply the burn with silk. after making the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long until they are well comforted.
If it is dislocated again, something comes out quickly, therefore make a cauterization on the large cauterization clavicle, or on the point of cauterization when pricking.
Because the joint is closed, and it is healed by the moisture and is healthy for the patient.
When the stomach comes with coldness and moisture as it is drawn to its complexion, and the catarrh is multiplied on it, and the usual cures are applied, and it does not benefit, then the patient must have the physician's care on his back, extend his legs and hands. After this, I do three caustics on the thigh, one after another, for the quantity of a dot, at all the cauterization points, and two cauterizations on the costals as much as the cauterizations are at three angles, and they should be spaced apart between them so they are not joined together as they grow sweat;
and be the cauterization if they are not long and thin like a hair, and the shape of the cauterizations should follow this form as closely as possible:
and if you see cauterization done on a large cauterization on the stomach following this form;
and the one who feels pain from this cauterization, should cauterize by pricking and holding on to the stomach at the point you see, according to the quantity you see; then the cauterization should be done to the entire cauterization that is called "points";
After the cure of the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
When the liver feels pain from constipation and moisture and large feces, as long as it is not removed from its natural complexion due to excess; And the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it will not profit them if they are sewn up on their own will. And a sign of encephalitis III is made according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, defeat the epigastriums, either the costal cartilages come.
And it is spaced between each cauterization of the growth of a doe. And let the cauterizations be long on the course and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization.
And let the half be only the joints of the knee, and let the patient lie on his side.
If it cannot be done, then it is best to be cautious, and extend his legs, and loosen his bows.
And if you wish to, when cauterizing these dull-cut cauterizations, be subtle and gentle in the art, and make sure you do not burn the whole body, because you will dry out the entire corpse. and that it does not return to the mud, because the bones are very delicate in this place, and they do not want to see it.
When he has come to the liver, and you know whether he is in the true liver or in the wound. If he is in pain, he feels the pain is too much.
And if he is in a fever, he feels sudden pain.
And when this remedy does not help the eyes, it comes to pass that the patient's head is swollen.
Then cut off the shoulder or the swollen part, and then heat the cauterization which is similar to a tooth, according to what is shown here is the form. And cauterize until the skin is cooked, and then pull out the arrow, as long as the wound is all healed.
After the treatment according to the treatment of bloods, as long as it is healthy.
1. And no other cauterization is needed but this one, unless it has been studied by those who have long practiced in the art of medicine, and by their hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Therefore, it is difficult to overcome, and I seem that it is better to leave it alone.
Do not cry, the cauterization will help.
1. The ancients said that one must make cuts from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: 1. Take a long and dry Aristolochia root, as long as you can find it, and it should be as large and long as your fingers; 1. And mix it with oil, and then heat it, and cauterize the cut between the strength and the collar, and two small cuts in descending order in the part that is loose where the beard is;
And II burns between the fifth rib and the seventh, descending on a small piece of wood. and I burn the navel, and I another at the stomach, and I between the second ribs, and it has two points that pierce the cauterization that is between the ribs.
and do not press with your hand, but open it as much as you can smell.
And no one has ever heard of anyone using a fire cauterization similar to the lancet, and they are shaved and placed between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the incision. and the pain will flee if it is like we have said in the lancet of the liver.
But in this case, there is pain or the patient dies now, or fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse.
When you treat the disease of the mouse that we have said in the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit much, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you all know.
Despite the manner in which it is, if you make III burns or IV, aligning according to the length of the hairs, according to the figure of the bowel-like cauterization we have mentioned before;
and do not press your hand on all the burn, and let the patient's back be on the ground.
and another way of burning if you wash the burn that has two ends, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and gently cut the hair where the hairs are, or the painful part of the patient comes from the side, and the elevations that you cut on the hair according to the hair, according to the length of the chest, and the burn should be according to the length of the chest.
After the two nerves are inflamed as much as the pain can be felt from the other side, then take the fire cautery, and in it insert the four.
And if you see, if you cauterize all of the cautery at three nerves.
After the treatment when it has gotten phlegm due to long tenacities, and this is the other cure that should be said.
Cauterization is not for dropsy, but in the way that is called "ascites".
When you cure according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries entor the bowels, and through the stomach, and through the liver, and through the gallbladder, and along the back, through the spine, and at the end, through the pit. And let the cauterization be close to the edge of the skin.
After letting the cauterization overgrow, let the patient's skin dry thoroughly, and do not reapply the treatment after the cauterization. And the wound will heal, and the two instructions will be assembled with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization on the belly is the clavicle that we have before it to show. And on the back, it should be olive-colored, according to what is placed before it.
When the feet are curved towards the wet one, and are flat like yellow citron, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular. and gently place your hand with the fire cautery so as not to turn it.
And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the wound will become infected, and let the cauterization be done according to this form:
After applying two cauteries on each leg at the sharp point of the cuticle; and let the longer cauteries be on either side of the genital area in front and the other pointing downwards, on the leg;
and leave the cauteries longer so as to cure, that it does not hurt in the end.
after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vitamins and digestive juices that are in the stomach and intestines are inflamed and cannot be cured by usual cures. You see the patient suffering greatly and of great courage, if I perform a good cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or a cauterization on the stomach, the cauterization circulates. And I perform four cauterizations on the bowel subtly at all the subtle cauterization points, and I perform two cauterizations on the nails.
If you see many moisture and the patient is suffering, then the fire cautery should be performed on the point where it hurts, and on each side of it, and on the large part of the stomach, because the cure is effective when it has good help.
of the cure of the hemorrhoids
When the embolisms are either formed or multiple, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if I perform cauterizations, it does not profit him. I. The physician inserts the spine of the thumb into the wound, which is barely covered by a small amount of dirt and dust, and then performs the fire cautery on the throat with the two-pronged iron.
II. If you think that the stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and the face begins to swell, then you should cauterize the face as it has been said, along with the liver and the gallbladder on all the clavicle. III. And leave the cauterization over for a long time. After healing the limb as much as possible.
IV. When you cut the gallbladder, if it seems to be too hard, then put it on fire and burn it all while you cut. and let your hand remain so that the fire cautery comes to the birth of the vein, without cutting.
do this once or twice, and if it does not work, then cauterize again as we have said. after the treatment of wounds, which are healthy enough.
and if you cauterize with a large fire cautery on the skin, it will give more help.
When the patient cannot endure tightening or opening, we will tell you about it in their own words, if they come to a disease that cannot be healed because of cauterization.
If no fistula comes, and it is awake and exudes milk and corrupt moisture, if you prove it to be totally silent, and keep hold of all the tent until it has enough.
after washing the cauterization tool and the cut that was made, and draw it out of the fistula according to the amount that it tries and is inserted, and continue the cauterization as much as the corset and the crust are burned, once or twice, depending on the amount of the char.
And you are to heal the wound of the beast that is injured, and large wounds.
If the fistula is in the course of the uterus and the intestine, and if you heal these wounds, and do not make this further than in the liver, and think that it is not a serious matter.
After curing the liver as much as it is healthy, and if the wound is infected, and the materials are long and tense, then you can be sure that the liver is completely cured.
And if the materials are not long and tense, be sure that the liver is not found, and corroded the bones at the foot. And as for one of these that we will mention in his neck.
When pain in the head comes on, and is accompanied by large ventosity, and no woman can take it, then you must first cauterize the hair on both sides of the head using the cautery iron that we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize in a short time, then there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more assistance.
of the bladder When the bladder is full and weak from headache and moisture, if the midwife retains the urine, then you must first cauterize in the part where the hair grows on the bladder, either on the left or right side, and each one should be cauterized as we have done with a penis.
I will perform a fire cautery on the back, or you can do it yourself with care.
and make the fire cautery according to the form mentioned earlier.
When the mother is cold and wet, and does not allow any part to conceive, and the flow is corrupted and late in its termination. and when they come, it causes great pain. Therefore, it is necessary to perform the third cauterization at the anus, as we have said, or cauterize the uterus, and then cauterize the back.
and make the fire cautery according to what we have said.
When the thick moisture descends to the handle of the axe, and for this reason if it does not move with its own weight, then the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found that the hairs are of the desired department, if you must cauterize the patient on the axe handle at the cautery in the shape of a circle, and before the hair turns around the handle so that the handle is inside the circle; then the handle is inside the circle.
and if it is the cauterization like those of the stomach that has been cauterized.
And if this cauterization is not present, then make three olive oil cauterizations and let the cauterization be like all the hairs.
And the cure as long as it is healthy.
of the pain of the gallbladder When pain comes in the thigh bone, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with pills of fetid smells, or other bones-like pills. After I have burned him.
And the way of the burn is according to these ways: It is necessary to know how to mix burning medicines and cauterize with fire.
For the fire cautery, it is recommended to have several methods, among which some are as follows:
That you should cauterize the boil of the hair at the third level using triangular cautery according to this form, and make a deep and large incision, and let there be a space between each cauterization of an inch, and it should be olive oil.
Never has cauterization been done on the hair of the head, because there are four according to this form.
And if you see, that the cauterization is done with the circle cautery that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the hair.
But I make it in such a way that the circles contain the whole cheek, and all the spots where it may be sore.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the surgeon says the pain is great, then cauterize it with the iron or the surgeon's knife, and there are four cauterizations to be made, one on the side.
And if it is the cutaneous cauterization, and the spot is sore.
And if the surgeon feels that the pain spreads to two or three points or near the wound, then cauterize it at the point where it feels the pain, which is called "points". And if it is a skilled person, then I will do more.
If the pain is on the groin side towards the thigh, then it should be cauterized using a sharp or circular cauterizing instrument, and you should take good care of all your cauterizations so that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
I have also seen others who cauterized on the ankle and caused so much pain that the entire leg became swollen, the foot, and it was noticed and corrupted in all the toes. After a solution of belly which caused death.
If the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both sides according to this manner.
The wise ones say in the cauterization of the thigh, if it is like this, then I will do it as follows and it should be as big as some giant's finger or a smaller one, and it should be interlaced and should be between each other without leaving any space in between;
And let the interventions be overseen by two parties, and also like noes, and it should have one main piece of well-made iron.
and it is the form.
And it should be washed as much as it is red and wet, and then placed on the handle of the male medical knife, and it should be turned on the sharp edge.
and the fire cautery is used once the cautery is re-ignited and it is left for three years. and then apply a poultice of burrs, and leave the wound open long-term. after the treatment of ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cauterization due to its harshness and few people use it.
And all this is harsh cauterization that they can endure, and either they suffer or not.
If the medicinal cauterization is that you make I and instrument with sharp points inserted between the cheek and the mouth, and it is either of iron or of copper, a certain length long, and in the upper part has II of us, and between each of them the quantity of growth of a tooth. and be over extended and sutured, and are joined together according to this form:
After putting the handle of the comb on the patient's shoulder, gently press your hand on the handle of the comb. After dipping the comb in the hot water for about an hour, let it dry completely, and the patient will suffer from fever and arsenic poisoning.
For it is similar to the pain of fire.
And when the pain has passed, use your hand with the instrument and gently lift the comb of fire, and leave it for three days, and apply as much bruising as there is blackness in the scar. and let it remain for three days before taking a bath
and this would be the aid on the back after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy
And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that is shaped according to what you have done in the shoulder;
And this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written or described the correction of medicine; 1. Mix alkali and live fire, as much of one as the other, and blend them together, and put them in a new pot. Or if there is a small piercing that can be pointed with a razor and then pulled out;
Or if there is a small piercing that can be pointed with a razor and then pulled out; And put on the other hand and the other, and put on alcali and chalz and soft ointment as much as you have dust from the powders that you will have well prepared in your hand;
And he leaves it as is until the wound has stopped bleeding and has begun to scab, then takes all of this, and the grease and alkaline substances like before.
And when it will be full of wounds and is maintained in the body's moisture and other cauteries of the members.
For it makes the work like fire, and if other medicines are used, such as well-cauterized hamstring with tesisie, anacardi, chalz with soap, all these things mixed together.
Galiens tells us of a remedy that was used to treat the pain of the scalp and sciatica, and he says that this is the only cure, and that it was cured in one session every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed as instructed after the treatment.
And then in this way that you prescribe to apply green, fresh and dry verdure, and the wound with a little fat, and place on the thigh, knee, and leg where the pain holds, and close it.
When left alone for three hours, the patient will no longer feel the pressure.
Then I put him in a bath as much as his chest is raised, and then I let him enter the water, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
And you should advise that no one should use such a hot cauterization medicine after the evacuation of blood.
Dyascorides states that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the horn of a he-goat, it can help alleviate the pain.
And it must be made in part manner. Take the gall and grind it with oil, then put it in the flask that is between the little finger and the other which is called the fozen.
After taking the horn of a he-goat dry, and setting it on fire until it is charred, and then placing it on the hair, and leaving it as long as it remains stained.
And repeat the process again, and continue doing it as long as you think by touch that it is returning to its place, and that the pain is subsiding.
The first sentence to translate is: "Et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».
From the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by touch or percussion or from too great evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, but rather for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient has been given pills or other remedies, which are placed on their back, while the pain remains, three lines of encastrément, and in each line, cauterization or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear.
and it should be made according to the cauterization called "points".
and if you see, make three or four cauterizations on the spine according to this form:
This disease often occurs in many children, and the signs of the beginning are when they start to close their eyes as they sleep, and suffer. And you should know about the spine on the lower back and how it appears when compared to other spines.
When you see this and you see it cured, if the cauterization is done at the fire according to this form. If the cauterization penetrates every part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the end of the spine by pricking two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
After the limb is healed according to what we have said, and you are warned that you will not perform a fire cauterization on the spine that is in the nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in joints due to moisture occurs at each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and remedies from medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in a certain way:
Make the mouth of the cauterization on the joint of the foot, and the olive-shaped cauterization according to this form:
If it is your desire that you prick the cheek with a sharp point, then the cauterization is done throughout the entire cauterization as claimed "point". And when pain comes to the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, it is necessary to cauterize on each knee three or four parts of the cauterization, at all the olive-shaped cauterization:
When you have further skill, if you do more, but hold your hand steady only as much as the task requires, and do not strain yourself too much.
And if the pain descends to the knee and to the back, apply the cauterization that we have described in this chapter.
If the pain is in the hands, then make points every two lines.
And if there is no more pain, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
If the pain comes from the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part and give the patient government to the midwife and appropriate medicines.
For if you give him medicine and purge the poison, he will be saved by God's help.
When the dislocation comes in twists, and the bones hang down like nails, and it is new, then it happens that when you see to cure it, it should not be removed from its place. and that it uses things that relieve stomach pain, if the pain descends from the stomach.
after the patient is placed on their back between your hands, and they are commanded to scratch their hair until the dirt is repaired, and it is re-attached to your fingers, and you sign that there is a sign of half a circle around the curved ends, and in every way that seems like the other half of a circle.
then rinse the cauterization of this form:
As long as it is white and glistening, feel it. Then reset the dirt on their back. and he applies his finger to his hand to make sure they do not return.
And well works the thighs on the patient, and removes the hip bones and serjeants on the thighs, and another on the loins that ties the hands.
Then place the cautery at the sign of the thumb on all hands, and hold it firmly and as long as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it for the first time, then repeat it again as soon as you touch the bone. And be careful not to let the blood seep out while doing the cautery. that you do not burn it. and that the patient does not die, or other evils.
And you should know that when you do not come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done subtly according to the size of the wounds, and so with the adults as well, according to their size.
After three days, cure the patient's leg from burns as much as possible until the swelling subsides.
After the treatment of other wounds as much as possible until it is healthy, and hold the patient's back for 40 days after the wound is well healed.
And it is necessary that his nails be long and not cut for a long time, so that the dirt does not come out when he bathes in bedrooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he should cut a well-made belt, and every four days.
and let him rest, that he works hard and drinks too much beer and mead, and burns too high.
And when he has learned this instruction, he is entirely healthy.
And I will say this after the trimming in his chapter.
When roils come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you should cauterize them according to their quantity, and it is the third part of the ear. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and no one of the ancients has said to do this cauterization on the patient at three angles according to this form:
1. The shoulder is dislocated and I make a line for the width of the fracture, and another for the defense, and hold your hand to all the cauterized clavicle.
1. However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and less painful.
1. there is no pain in any limb. 1. When pain comes to any part of the body, whether from cold or injury, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the cauterization that is called "points", and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb and its narrowness and sharpness and its knot and its location of knots and its pain.
if it is healthy enough for the first cauterization, that is good;
if this is the case, then another cauterization should be made on the same member that was affected, because it is customary to die in the member that is affected, but you must make the cauterizations as long as the patient's health allows;
Miscarriages are never helped by cauterization once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Can you see the cauterization? Be warned if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not last or does not tire, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, therefore I make the cauterizations on the main member: I remove the head, and the other at the end of the cheeks. and I remove the two corners, and the back removes the arrow.
and I hold the hand so much that the fire cautery comes to the bone, and so much that the pus comes out fast, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
and I cauterize the mouse according to what is before.
And if the scar is scattered everywhere. And if the wound is clearly visible, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned or head, and I cauterize at the end of the shoulder, and II cauterize at the end of the back, and I grant the hip and the other parts, and II at the two shoulders. And II cut the sides, and II cut the tendons as much as possible, and I cut each joint of the hands and feet, and cut the pits of the hands.
and cut the nerves that are under the heels, which you do not burn.
and never done a cauterization on the bone, and I did it on the stomach bone, and I did it on the liver.
And advise that the more you do cauterization, the more help you get, and it benefits you.
And advise that the patient does not feel pain during cauterization if they do not feel it, because the heart is already corrupted.
And it should be that the fire cautery is large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
After treating the dough with flour and honey, and other remedies, as long as it is healthy.
When inflammation comes to any part of the body and is cured by medicines and ointments and plasters, and it is not healthy, therefore I make a cauterization on the part according to its size and thickness.
and if the cauterization is made on a small part of the flesh. then the treatment of ointments as long as it is healthy.
And never made is cauterization at the hand, arm, and back, after the least amount of skin that holds the part, and if it inflames the part.
and nothing enters in between if it is not known of the members and the movements of the arms.
When the disease known as "albaras" is awakened, and the art of medicine offers no help, then the fire cautery is used on a small part, according to the quantity of the esparment, until the bleeding stops and the color changes.
Then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and cures for the colon and anus, each for a part. And let it all be mixed together, and apply it with a cloth, and wash the limb as often as necessary until it is healthy.
The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
When the sore first appears, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done at the cauterization point that seems to be a circle, all around the circumference of the sore.
And everyone says that a cauterization is made at the site of the gangrene.
And everyone says that this does not seem strange to me, because I believe it is ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted this to happen once.
And the most correct thing is that they are cauterized at the entrance, at the cauterization called "circulation", as we have said in our mouth about cauterizations.
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to measure or because of the excess it makes or because of the old age of the patient when he is old (that is, too many) and has little blood, or for lack of tension. And you see the surgery as a means to an end. However, the cautery is performed by pricking with the tip of the instrument. After which it is left to its own devices. For it will try to die.
And if you see it struggling to die, if the cautery is hot enough, then it is the form of the cautery that causes it.
When the patient has the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is perceived by the cur, and such cauterization that the patient feels it in a way that the course of the urine is alleviated.
After the cure, when it is perfectly healthy.
Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a rot of the member, because it eats the members as it does the dry wood.
If you see this disease in the shoulder that can suffer from fire cautery, then sharpen the cauterizing instruments according to where the shoulder or the disease is.
After the cautery of all parts as much as possible, there will be nothing left of it, and everything that is corrupted will become osteit.
Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil until the scars from the hot iron are healed and all the corruption is cured.
After the treatment of burns caused by fire.
And if you see after three days that healthy children are not born, it is bad.
If not, then if it resumes the cauterization on that which is required to remove the decayed hairs.
And this disease has never been treated with medical care in the place of fire cauterization;
but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said the treatment of the ague in the division: take what you have at your disposal.
of porings that come to the toe often happens that the toe is affected by a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that causes pain in the toe.
And the treatment of this disease is done in two ways. It is to know that the treatment is by fire cauterization, and by hot iron cauterization.
Cauterization with fire is that you shave and cut the hair as a pen of wool, and it should be made of iron in the size that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has subtle margins;
After the bone is cut at the joint, and turn your hand completely around the pin as it comes out of the bone. and leave it for three days until it begins to secrete milk. Then make a poultice of freshly boiled barley flour with milk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the bones will be loosened from their roots.
Then treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
And if they become converted by fever, and many times come out and in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you do a hot cauterization. and is done in this way: 1. Take a nail or iron rod, or a feather quill, and put it on the clavicle and the sternum, it is to know how to remove rudenesses. 2. And if it pierces the whole thickness, then he puts a small piece of hot wax, and holds your hand firmly, and turns it around until the edge of the nail touches the root of the bone, and then find the hot wax path smoothly just below the root;
3. And endure the pain of the hot wax bite for an hour; 4. Then leave it alone, and it will fall apart at all its roots.
I then make another after, as you are raising all these that are in the course, and cure the wounds that entangle hair.
When any tremble from cold, or fever, or other cause, it comes that you must make four cauteries or four on the spine, one cauteries between each spine. and I cauteries or pierce, and I make a cauteries on the stomach with the olive cauteries.
if you let it tremble, and when it gets better of the cold disease.
No time is seen by defuers the body's skin, or pustles that come from large corrupt materials.
if it comes that at first you must make a cauteries on each tip of the pimple when they appear. a subtle cauteries of mithra's pitch, or if the tip is seized by fire, or from the root of Aristolochia long, or on the lenticular cauteries.
And never does the cauterization begin at the start when they appear, according to this manner, and it cannot grow hair in front, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great dislocations of blood from the artery that is covered by the wound that comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of a limb, and similar things. and it is a great grief to cleanse.
And then, when there is none, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press it as much as it is not calmed by your finger, and does not cause more pain.
Then, place the olive-wood cauteries that are both small and large on fire, until they are all red.
Then, I, according to the size of the wound and the strength of the vein, and whether it is arterial or venous, place the cauterization on the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterization as long as it is not extinguished.
If it happens that you feel your child's vein when you prick it with the cautery, and the cautery has stopped, then quickly take another cautery that is hot.
And do not stop doing this until the other is exhausted.
and make sure you do not burn the flesh that is already cooked, and no other harm comes to the patient.
and make sure you do not cut the artery too deeply, because if it is large, it cannot be well healed immediately after the artery is cut, and this can only be done by one of the four methods we have mentioned. or by cauterization or extraction when it is not well treated, or by strong sewing thread, or by medicines placed on it that can help to heal the wound. And let it be tied and held tight.
Whoever will manage the tightening of the knots or the placement of burning things on, or other similar things, should not profit from it if he does not have time.
And if there is no remedy or medicine available, then place your finger on the wound as we have described, and hold it firmly until it is sore from the wound and the vein. And do not move the patient, but their arm should be cold often, as it is usually cold and becomes frozen and swollen and sore.
and make sure to have beforehand the materials needed for cauterization and medicines.
In our previous chapter, we discussed the first cauterization or burning medicine, and its uses, causes, effects, and forms of cauterization.
I have placed the fire cautery of the head of the shoulder, and I will go to this chapter by my own way because it is lighter than the other.
2. And if I begin this, it is necessary, my dear, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
I advise you not to attempt foolishness. For there are many methods used in treatments. if they come from such people who are with their disease so lightly that they die by the force of their disease and the greatness of their malice; And from these, one must have fear.
And of these I say to you, Wait, I am hurried. And the disease is dangerous.
It is only by your consent that those who come to you can do this in this way, but put more trust in your honor than in your covenant, and do not advise him foolishly but wisely of what you are certain and what you have taken or lost.
and use divination and indication in the cures of your patients for health to be converted.
and this will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory of the long-lasting.
Thrice-blessed are our Lords, who give understanding and rightness to you, and if you wish to hope for the holy inspiration of their hand, amen.
Or I have commanded this chapter in declaring it as a cauterization, according to the cauterizations, which I have declared for the chief joints, because you will find it more lightly than other work.
1. This disease often comes to children several times in the womb of the mother, and when the child is pulled too hard by the head.
2. And never has this come from a reason that can be known.
3. And I have never seen this disease happen in anyone but in children, and in those that I have seen, it has caused death. 4. And for this reason, I think it is better to leave the work of this chapter in part treatments.
5. And I have seen a child of whose head was swollen with inflammation, and the head grew larger each day until it could not be supported.
And he thought so much of the moisture that it caused his death, and this moisture is gathered between the bone and the sinew, from the knee to the bone.
And the work is such that if the moisture is between the knee and the bone, and the incisions are small, then you should cut off the head with a wide slice.
And so long as the moisture persists, until the swelling decreases.
And then there is the form of the salve:
If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, then I will make incisions in this manner: according to this form:
And if the moisture is between the bone, and you see the corners of the head swollen from each part, and the heat shakes when you press with your hand on the dent, and this has not been repaired: If it is necessary to cut off the head of the shoulder, then you must cut it off in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After pulling out the threads and powders, and mix in wine and oil, and leave it for five days.
Then dress the wound with bandages and poultices, and let the shoulder be evenly pressed, and then apply the blister of dry meat to the member as much as it is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is to look at or open the mouth of the abscess, and assemble the sharp edges.
For no time has it been before; no time has it been behind; no time has it been in front; and no time has it been to the side;
Measure the opening of the abscess and the fullness of the eye, and follow what you can according to your ability;
and beware that you do not cover the artery; and come quickly if the patient dies from blood loss, which is due to the wound and the evacuation of pus;
When there is any disease called "catarrh" which is in the nose or ear, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
It is necessary, can you cover the eyes, that the patient suffer no harm to his head; After rubbing the leg with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then tighten the bandage around the neck as much as possible. Then look at whether the vein is bent, and the letters on both sides are after the ears, and they are responded to.
Then mark the veins with a sharp needle, and cut both ends of a piece of skin as thin as possible, until the size comes to the bone, and this is by the widest part of the head.
And if you see, cut the cloth over the artery and cover it with a nail, by cutting as much as necessary, just like two.
When the vein is pricked, it will continue to bleed without stopping.
And if the artery does not open by feeling, then measure the quantity of the space of III degrees, then mark the vein and cut it to the bone.
And it comes to pass that when there is need for sixty sutures, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If the wound is not on the bone and the dressing that was applied does not come off, then press on the wound and hold it in place, and treat it with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "de emigrainne When the head begins to ache, and the gout comes, and the moisture from tears and sweat causes the old pain to worsen, and it is treated with ways of medical cures and all that does not benefit it, if we stricken the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
And the manner of extracting them if the patient has hair on his temples, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is only slightly reponed as opposed to any men who are too rough.
When it is reset, if it tightens the neck of the patient's shoulder from some cloths, then rub the shoulder with some rough cloth and warm water until the artery is clearly visible. Then take the spatula of the material that is here formed: Then lightly scrape the light leather until you reach the artery, then raise it to the top with tweezers, and remove all the threads that are loose from each part;
And if the artery is subtle, then turn it to the tip of the uncinate bone, then the hook of that part according to the number of the two heads; For if it is not crowned, then it will not be able to move at all.
And take out six pints of blood, as needed.
And if the artery is large, then take out two pints of blood at a time, using a double-stranded silk thread that does not come before the wound and causes dislocation of the joint.
Then remove the excess that is between the two hundred and sixty threads in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization of the fire cautery is enough for the bone as long as the heads are removed.
And this is the worst work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion. For the fire cautery is aid to finish the moisture: For this reason, it is of greater help when moisture is present.
It is necessary to extract the veins by filling the groove of the arm with soft cotton and tying it well made ties.
And if you untie them, be sure to use dry medicines that make the wound healthy and bandages.
And if there is no artery cut, as you wish, then if you need to cauterize, use your arm of vitrol and hold it in your hand so that it does not become infected. And if you do not have this presently, then put the arm of yours in as much as it does not freeze, and wash it with cold water as often as possible, and hold it tightly as it should be.
And it should have between the two cuts one that is large enough, and then when you see the two ends coming together, hold the fire red as long as it reaches the bone, and close the vein in the two cuts. And they should be separated between the two heads because this fire cautery is not suitable for everything.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And what is heavier and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cautery cutting with two parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer on the pain. For when the storm is too fierce, then it holds less charm.
of tears When the tears of the hairs are descending from the veins that are exposed to the heat of fire, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment, and you see the patient's face swelling, and you feel like frenzy, so much so that it resembles a seizure. And if the hair is thin and moist, so that the paper's hair looks wet, and the papers are smoking, and burned by the heat of the tears, then it has something to do with this treatment. And they called it the "fractured cure," and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease, the hair that he has or front, then I made three cuts on the front according to its length.
And they called it the "fractured cure," and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease, the hair that he has or front, then I made three cuts on the front according to its length. And let one of the furrows be as the other two at the front, when advancing, but do not advance too far, and the others are the costels by which the papers are placed, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are caused by the papers.
And move your hand away from the continuation of the II mandibules, and each wound should be treated with III quantity at the joints.
And make sure to have a piece of sponge and wipe the sac with cloth, then apply the ointment in two parts of this form:
from the incision that is made in the temple to the second incision. And scorch all that is between the two flaps of the entire face that is exposed to the bone, then make another incision along the other second, and then extract this splinter. 2. If the bone is stuck in the first finger with the instrument called "cultellary," and it is very well cut on one side but not on the other, do not cut further, and this is the shape:
3. Then the costeit is cut towards the cheek and the bone is suefy towards the bone, and the dislocation as far as it reaches to the second incision.
And cut all the veins that descend from the head as hairs until the incision is continued as it was open, and then make another incision along the other side.
And then extract the blood evenly, and express the leu for the blood taken.
Then place a piece of clean cotton in each vein, and wrap it with soft cloths soaked in wine and oil, and make sure that the wound does not leak.
And at the end of the third day, the limb is removed, and great quantities of tincture of iodine are applied, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until it is healthy.
If no one comes with a cataract treatment, and you see the hairs thick and short, the eyes distorted, and the papers burned. And the hair grows, and it causes great pain in the eye, and the patient suffers. However, these accidents are better than those materials and that cataract not coming from many veins, and the cure that is here.
And is that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut along the forehead, and another wide one below it. And begins with the burning of the left temple to the right temple, and it is the incision just to the bone. and pulls your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the ear;
And when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto a sponge, and then dries between the two lips of the burn and puts cotton on it, and tries lin; and applies softened drapes rolled in wine and oil, and keeps away from infection;
When it is hardened, if you must rub the bone as much as possible until it starts to crack, then the treatment of things that are excised, which make the hair grow back;
1. "In this manner:" - This phrase is used to introduce a new action or process. 1. Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of silk, and make a paste; 2. And apply this paste to these wounds to prevent infection.
Of the fever of the ears
3. All that affects the ears is one of the four things: 4. or grains, or beast, or mineral point, or similar thing as though it were made; 5. or seed, if it is like grass, seeds, peas: 6. or thing that flows, if it is like fever and chill and similar things:
When it comes to the ear, if the piercing or another part of the thing does not fit well in the ear, and does not grow in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
7. If you see the point, if no drop of violet or lavender oil is distilled from any vessel, then apply the extraction: And I made it thinner with condensation, and it sweats on the nose when it condenses comes, and puts it into the ear pieces of wool or linen. and it is in the ear down.
Many times comes out through this treatment.
and if it does not come out, it is the extraction of needles, which is this form:
And if it jumps out as needles, that's good.
And if not, then the extraction of the bone with a small drill.
And if it does not jump out, then I make a ring of iron and cut the head of the ring or the ear hole, and it sweats which is inside the ring of wax so that it cannot enter with the ring. Then the hot iron forms, for fire comes so often as we have said.
And if it does not come in part like this, then it gets stuck in the bones and puts on any instrument that is not pointed for this purpose, and puts a piece of cotton in between. Then press the hot iron on the wound or whatever it is, and fire comes.
And if it does not come from all these things we have said, if you do not split the ear but only cause an abscess and come, and spasm.
And the way to split it if you do is to first cut the head of the shoulder according to its strength, then hold the shoulder in your hands and turn the ear away from the face, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or depending on the limb. And let the burn be as a moon, until you reach the hole, then the bone according to your pain, and the saliva is hastily in your mouth.
and the cure as long as it is healthy.
And if it is grainy and oozes, then administer extraction.
And if it cannot be expressed, then administer this remedy according to this form: and make an incision on that grain.
But do not make haste when you think the grain is moist from the ear, as long as you have made many pieces.
Then extract it with fine forceps and at the saliva, as we have said, if the extractions are alleviated.
In the ear, therefore, that the patient has grains in the ear, it is necessary that the surgeon uses the first condiement of the cloth and amplifies the ear with soft cotton. And let there be caution with the same ear or eye. If she jumps for this reason, it's good.
If this does not work, then if you have many spikes according to the length of your arm, remove them at your own risk and lightly scrape them off. Then put the helper on the ear, and it comes out through its other holes, and comes out of another hole that is in the ear. And continue to make this cut until the wound is fully healed, and then it will jump all at once.
And if you see, if you have a wound, and cut one of the ears, and the other ear holds on tightly until the pain is less, then.
Then I made another incision as much as it needed, until all was out, as we have said in the opening.
In the removal of the fetus, if it is small in size, like a pea and similar things, cure as we have said in the division.
but if it is large in size, one can feel it, by using forceps for extraction. and that is the more gentle thing to do in the ear.
In the removal of the ears' jewelry, if you are careful as we have said in the division and when treating distillations, and the care does not profit much, if it comes that you look at the ear with the sun: If it is not opened at all, if the forceps are subtle, and if it is not noticed, then take the chain of this case in your hand:
And let it be narrow and wide. And cut off the more subtle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then they will all form together as a chain. Do this often until you see that it is all done.
And if they do not follow in seeing, then stifle the chain of cotton as I said in the wound.
And if they do not swell as we said, then administer distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or treat them with distillations.
If you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, either it will be shaped as you see fit: And may silver or gold wires be inserted through the small holes, and then be distilled.
and to press the distillation onto the well-made silver instrument, and if you see the nasal hair removal and envelope around the point of the tip: then you can pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube is in the ear:
then blow the hair removal tool with all your strength, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear: The patient feels pain, and it is the distillations that are in the ear; however, they are not drawn out immediately due to heat. and make sure it is not too cold, as the medicine would not work if it were not.
Of the fever of the ears
No child is born without having purulent otitis.
And this same thing happens due to inflammation of the wound, or from a child being born with an ear infection, and these inhalations never come back into the ear unless one can see.
And it has never been seen that the purulent otitis is cured, and it is well seen.
That which comes in front of it, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of further healing, and then you must put the maid's ear to the sun. and watch diligently: if you see the apparent inflammation, if the work has done all this swelling of coi, then it is the form:
And so and behind and below it, if it does not cause the ear to bleed:
if the inflammation is of the ear or the ear's cartilage, if you hold it with fine forceps and a light grip, as long as the ear is entirely free:
And if the exfoliation is fully removed from the ear, if you take a soft gentle rasping tool and slightly heat it, then it puts on either char or cors of the ear.
If you feel the ointment that the patient hears with grief, gently pierce, and keep your fingers away from the ear.
Then put a tent in the ear according to the large pustule, and apply Egyptian ointment. Do not use any jar until the wound is sore, or take a tent and apply pink ointment, and powder with vitrol broile.
And if you see the ear is swelling, then pull out the tent and roll another soft tent made of rose oil and wax, as long as it does not hurt. Then the doctor, as long as he is healthy.
2. If the discharge of blood increases, then dip a sponge and wet it with cold water, and place it in the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood, which are treated with distillations.
The one who comes from papers of hairs when they are moist and dry, if it happens that you extend them with needles and tweezers, and the crown of a spatula made of its roots. Then put the head in a vitreous ball.
And if it is not cut, then the fire cautery subtle one, and the cautery after the incision is worth doing.
And they are often repaired, but nothing tired of their roots. And when they are burned by fire, those roots are ass and do not return.
Of the grease Many times, things come in papers from the hairs that seem wrinkled in their form and hardness, and for this it is this disease called "granulation", and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of these and soaks. The dissection is such:
The dissection is such: The granulation is held by two parts and it is light to know.
After making the incision large, then scrape each part gently, then take it with tweezers and the thread.
If you do not cut the thread with a little paper, if it does not hurt the patient.
and if it is sharp, then assemble a suture, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
and if it is small, then do not make too much force, because the remaining parts will not restore it and cause further harm.
And if the grain falls down to the base of the ear towards the part below, if reversed, and the grain is picked up with tweezers, and the cloth is pressed from both sides.
and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm.
And when the grain is picked up, if you lift the salty ointment, and treat the skin of that which causes further harm as much as possible until the patient is healthy.
2. of the grease of the hairs 1. "Exinach" is a grease that is engraved on the sheets of papers, and this happens more as children grow older, and it causes pain to their eyes, and they come to the catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears come to their eyes.
2. And because they sleep with their faces turned away, and lie down on them, and their papers are wet from the moisture that the child has rubbed on them, and the appearance is covered with the grease of exinach that has opened in the oil. When you press on your joint and feel the exertion within it.
3. And the way of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand.
And then take a piece of cloth, and make a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exudation from each part, and then put it on. and press with your two hands on both sides, until the exudation is gathered in the circle.
Then put the patient in a wet cloth and sharpen a knife that is as wide as the wound you make when cleaning the vein, but not larger.
and cut it as much as you see the exudation. And in other positions, the exudation comes from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
1. Draw the thread all around your two legs, and turn your right and left hands as many times as it takes to separate them.
2. And make sure you do not strain the thread in the needle, that it does not go all the way to the head, that it does not break.
3. And if the thread does not open at the beginning of the needle, then lightly open the thread as much as it appears.
4. Then draw the thread as we have said, then cut the cord in two parts and tie it to your leg, and draw it tightly.
3. And if such men break their silk and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is dried.
Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
And if it comes to the abscess apoplexy, then the cure should apply dressings as long as he is healthy.
of the paper's hairs When hairs grow on papers other than their nature, and they are awakened, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as customary tears and softening of the paper and albugine, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
And the cure is according to four methods: Or by fire cauterization alone, or by medicinal burning according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done by cutting and stitching or by stitches, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your left hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your right hand.
If she is converted, it is good. If not, then insert an awl in all the flesh of it. And let this be the margin of the paper or the hair that grows from these hairs, and tear all the flesh at the edges, and turn it to the rasp.
Then in the part of the edge of the paper, the hair is adjusted, to all the sputum coping, from the large armor to the small.
Then remove the flesh, and put a small tent of cotton and drapery on the paper, then mark on the paper a figure of an enche, as the full moon, and when it is all done, it will come that the figure is according to the quantity you see being raised by the paper that is designed.
And if a part that has skill is able to handle a great quantity of paper according to the paper's flexibility.
Then make all the stitches according to the two lines you have written, and start with a large, firm knot but gradually. and then use one of the gaps near the natural hair in its growth, then cut the root at one of the two angles, and scrape it all.
Then assemble the two ends with a stitch using a needle of one aguille for all the subtle thread of wool, and remove the blood, and dry the superfluity of threads on the two scissors for any glutinous things, if you see this being done.
If not, if there is no cure, then leave the stitching and threads until III days or IV.
Then treat the wound with things that are loose and constricting, as the paper relaxes with the soaking of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is too tight (as they say in the old days), and it causes pain. And if another way:
And if another way: And if you see the paper as a figure that is also like the curve of the arrow, as we have experienced, at III inches, follow the form that is here:
Then comes he who surpasses with equal force according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or a thread, and the thread will mark the figure. and take another thread of the same length as the large hammer, and the second thread of the small size, and assemble the threads correctly between your two.
Then gently smooth your hand correctly, and gently smooth all the leather where you have cut, as we have experienced, then stitch the edges of the wound as evenly as possible, and treat it as long as it is healthy.
And if the abscess comes to your incision, then calm the inflammation and the pain by applying warm compresses and gentle massage.
and never happened that the hair of the paper was converted:
If you follow what we have said about the incision.
However, the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of the wounds is according to this form: And if you were to convert the paper and make it according to what I have said, and then make the wounds by hand, and tie them as finely and long as the paper and the widest part of the swelling is. And cut as you hold the threads.
Then stitch the two ends finely according to what is over the paper of the oil, and tighten the knots of the wounds. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
If it is delayed, if the force is not applied immediately, then the treatment will be delayed until it is safe.
And when the wound is dressed and the paper is lifted, and no more hair will be tied.
And this is the form of the second crops that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
The workings are such that you need a fine needle, and you pull one end of the silk thread. Then assemble the heads and carefully observe one and the other, and the length of the threads should be long.
Then order a fine silk thread for each head, and note the number of threads.
Then put the patient's head in your hand.
And if the sun is shining, then you should open it if possible, because these are subtle and small veins, then pull the thread all around in the root of the hair that is most dense, and draw it through the paper as you move the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair until it reaches the root, and pull out the hair in the root, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then, draw your hand as soon as the hair grows all over the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hair is treated and the hair does not grow with it, then you will cut off the hair at the base as ordered, as long as the hair does not grow and you see it through the oil's vision.
However, if you cut off the hair and the thread, and leave the oil and the leaf open for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and the wound appears.
And if the hair is shortened, and if long hair from the head is grown on it, and it is cut with that which you have left, as long as it is lengthened and then trimmed.
2. of the oil's dregs When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the food comes in the oil, if it happens in two ways:
1. naturally, and the other unnaturally.
And it comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
And the way of the wound is to cut it, and clean the lips of it, and put lint on it until it is healed.
And only what you use in the treatment of it are things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, then the disease becomes worse than the first.
but it works as things that soften, like figs. And the ash of the fire and the seed of lin are cooked, and the oil is melted in no oil at all, and wrapped in a tent, and the cure of this.
And your treasure is if you keep guard that it does not become worse according to the form it was before.
and the cases we have said are none that are not caused by this disease, that it does not relapse according to the form it was before.
This disease that is called "acaratism" is truly called "acaratism," and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and fracture and cauterization and things similar.
And the course of the work is if you take a needle, and if it has two threads, and the file in the char, and it seems to perceive on the left arm as much as on the right, if the threads come in the shoulder of the char;
Then the chair is at disadvantage to all the thread, and the cover is to the large spatulum. And if it seems like the paper returns according to what it should, that's good.
If not, then take the rasor and put it in the fire, and turn the paper, and make as many fires as the paper can endure.
And let the heads of the two angles of the incision you have covered be as the two angles of a letter that has no "I griesche"; and when they are assembled, it should look like a letter.
Then the chair, according to the quantity that its cost is as it should be, of what teaches the paper, then adjust the two loose parts, and the cost of a thread of linen.
Then comes the cure of what we have said about softening medicines and bandages, as long as it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from burning or cutting or cauterization, then you must shave the area smooth with the hair removed from the paper, and according to what is before; Then dip between the two lips of a tent, as I have said;
Then dip between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; And it must be done according to the form of the disease, as it is of different forms, and the skilled masters are able to make everything come back to its natural shape;
And the patient themselves, according to what is necessary for the opening and extraction of more parts in different ways.
When this sutures are made by women in a certain way that the paper on it is soaked with white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must cut the point of a razor soaked in oil and lift it up;
and you bend them as much as possible while you copy what is written on the soothing substance, which is neither too rough nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the soothing substance being too rough or making the oil run;
and so is your incision, which you burn the assembly lightly, if that paper regenerates according to its natural form.
and it is healed completely, and there are no times of the salty wet oil, and the soft wet oil, and the heat.
then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil soft wool in an abundance of ointment. and after the third day use hot water and things that are sour as long as it is healed.
Says that the nail can be done in two ways: She is nervous and resembles the hard skin of an iron, and another that is not nervous but resembles a frozen mucus, which when touched with fire and cooked with tongs, cannot be opened.
And the one and the other resemble the great fear, and grow little by little until they cover all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in the sand, then he operates on the eyes. And gently place the paper in your hand, then take one of the tongs with a small double hook, and hold it steady. Then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or sheephair, or cowhair, and make it thick. Then double the point of the needle with a pinch, and thread the hair through it, and perforate all the needle, and tie the hair with a thread and hang it at the end, and scrape off all the hair from the edge of the hair that covers the prunelle and silk on the chief, then cut off the remaining part in the root of the arm as subtle and as small forces as possible, and leave the natural or artificial one, so that by incision does not come the heart's usual tears.
And never has a toe been set once, and so on, as we have said. Then the scorching is applied, and all the skin is burned, and that is the form of it.
And be careful that the scorching does not touch the charred skin and break it, and the prunella is not pierced.
And after the incision, grease it with oil a small piece of linen thread, and a cloth is made from litargire, and it is left for the other day. Then the care of that which is needed until it is healthy.
If the finger is not tense, and you do not force the needle, and the bones do not enter, this appears as a sign of anxiety in the finger of medicine.
and I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, then use the light oil of the maiden, and take the soft sponge according to this form: And gently remove the finger underneath, and if you see that it does not become red and the reason is from your mouth, distill the ointment made of litargire and rouge coliere and seil broiet, and it will steep in the oil until the other day;
If nothing is against you in the oil, like a sore, then the milk and cure the sore first until it is healthy, then continue the incision as before, as long as it is healthy.
Then it resumes another evacuation according to this same work, as long as it is all done.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is dark in the oil, and it has spent in the onion, and a part is not all, that corps of tears does not come;
Then it distills into the oil that is made of litargire which is red and warm.
Some men's hairs never turn red, and they cut the prune and wrap it in papers and hang it up, and it seems like a rose of balsam.
When the patient is instructed if the surgeon places his head in your hand, then he operates on the eyes, and turns all that can be turned loose, and supports it with force.
Then follow the first step, and pull everything to the end, and make sure you do not pull the oil out of the wound.
And let the incision be as sharp as the one we mentioned in the incision of the toe, and with small forces you can cut it off, if after this chapter you demonstrate that it is like this.
When the incision is completed and all the pain is relieved, if you use olive oil or distill red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and apply it with a cotton ball dipped in urine, so that it is sure to stop bleeding.
If it does not cause any pain, and the wound is large, and you doubt the healing of the wound, then leave the oil and treat the wound with things that soothe the healing of the wound.
Then return to your work as soon as it is healed, and then make several cuts in the oil by this manner.
But it is necessary that you treat the cure of every weak oil of the natural way. and of the accidental way, in the work of iron.
and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that the limb is sore in that work.
If the veins are red and covered with oil, and they touch the eye and injure the other parts.
The first sentence translates to: "Firstly, look at the oil that comes out, if it is thin, there is no other disease but the oil. However, the cilium in this way:
Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand, then stretch those wounds all over according to your judgment, and make the wounds subtle as in this form:
And let them be cut in degrees of one course according to this form:
Then with your hand force the wounds to be subtle, and remove the blood as soon as you can see the bloodier wounds of the oil:
And be careful not to bleed the oil with points of spatula, and do this work by noon before the sun, and be patient in your work so that you do not miss any wounds:
And when you have this done, if you distill it in the green and red oil to corrode what is decaying and unclean.
And if you cannot distill all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the limbs, and leave some on for as long as the pain is soothed and the wound is secured against infection, then resume according to this method as soon as it is healthy.
And this is the form of the forces.
The mirer, if it is called "arissti" fistula,
When you cure with cauterization and by using the burning medicine according to what I have stated earlier, and it is not completely healed, then it must die, and all the moisture that it has, as long as the wound is open.
And when the wound is completely healed, and you will see the corruption and blackening, if all the instruments of this case are made of the same material.
and is called "sharp edge," and should be made of hard material, and should be cut as fine as a razor when it is in the present form.
And place the end of the bone on the corrupt bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as you sense that corruption is receding.
and do this only once, then restore the bone with excremental medicines.
If it is seen that the belly is swollen and hard, and the belly of the bowel is swollen, and remains for forty days, and it does not renovate and is not much affected, and accidents do not come, you should be careful that it is healthy.
If not, then there is no other way but to return the fistula to the neck of the newborn according to this form. And it is that you remove the second time from the bone with forceps and with medicines, and when he endures it according to this form, and the head of the forceps is at an angle of III degrees, and it should be as smooth as possible, so that you can see like this:
Then place the head of the forceps on the shoulder bone, and smooth your hand with oil, then turn the forceps completely so that it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you were holding your hand on your neck.
And then restore the medicated wound with dry dressings as I have shown you, and when he is healed and endures the pain, it will be the matter of the neck. If there is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the wound is open and does not stop bleeding, and there is no sign of infection or poisoning, then you must first treat the patient.
Then, the wound is cleaned with vinegar or vinegar without harming the skin, then it is anointed with oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcole, and then the oil is strained, and it is applied to bandages and cloths.
And the cloth is managed if you use enough wet cloths, and double each one, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the wound has.
Then comes strain by hard pressure of a bend, and restarts the veins with sucking without feeling pain.
Then comes the veins and leaves the strained oil for hours and nights, and the ligaments become loose, so that you must pull it out.
Then comes the ligament after the night and night, and if you see the oil repaired, it's good.
If not. If the friction resumes and the cloths, the ligaments, and the veins as long as it is healthy.
A sudden dislocation of the eyelid When disruptions come in the eye fabric, then it opens and comes out paper if like a grain of resin, and is difficult to see.
When you see this, the work is such that you can insert an awl at the root of the part that is swollen and inflamed, then insert another awl where there is a double thread of the part that is painful. and then remove the first awl according to its position.
then remove the second awl and pull out a part of the urethra, then pull it well, then remove the awl and put on some oiled linen in abundance.
and leave it until the threads are healed with the urethra, then treat the wound with things that are comfortable as long as the wound is healthy.
For no time is the wound restrained by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is sound.
And if the hairs have a great appearance, if it is pricked with a subtle needle that comes from the oil, and removes the moisture and descends the hairs, and comes to the end soonest.
Then the extraction is done as long as it is healthy.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not worse than boils that are assembled in the oil, appearing as sharp descending, and it is not sharp.
And the manner of appearance of the wound is if you wish to sit the patient on the side and straighten the arm, then take the head between your hands of two parts, and hold it as long as you see the bone coming to the end of your fingers. Then cut it off, and do not let it descend and be untangled, and see the patient's things as they should be.
And if it does not descend, you should know that it is acute, and if the bone comes out of the wrist is not straight as we have said.
If you wish to sit the patient between your hands, then take the scalpel subtly and make a cut under the corneal layer I poc by continuing the conjunctive with the corneal layer and the cornea, as long as the bone comes out.
When the dislocation occurs, if it is treated with hot oil mixed with honey, or hot vinegar and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment once it is healed.
of the oil's waters We have seen the appearance of waters in the division, and what must be done to perceive it. If it is done according to the health of the patient.
It is necessary that you place the patient's arm between your hands, using the light of the sun, and the oil is healthy and tightly moistened.
Then place the paper of the oil in your left hand, with the hairs growing towards the left, or in your right hand with the hairs growing towards the right.
Then take in your right hand, make the hairs on your left side straight, the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand, or the hairs on your left side straight.
Then place the tip of the instrument at the coronet through the largest ring in the bladder of the arm, then use the "almagda" instrument gently, and pull your hand as it pierces the bladder of the arm, and feel that almagda is entering the empty thing.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda hole is at the end of the spout that is close to the prunes. And it is the crown of the oil.
If you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then place the instrument just where it is, then press down on one or more holes afterwards.
If it becomes inflamed now, if it sees the surgeon in front of it and the instrument in its own hand.
After resting the small bone, and if the hammer moves the second hole, place the force with the instrument, and when it is aligned and does not move, lightly twist your hand around a little at a time.
And then place the hammer on a little glue, and lift the oil from it. Then apply a layer of oil, either finely ground in rose oil and with an excess of urine, and bind it with the healthy oil.
We, and those who are of our kin, put on clothes with much meat.
And if the oil cannot enter through the hair because it is too hard, since there are too many men with very hard hairs, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," which looks like this:
And pierce only the conjunctive, and do not cut too much at once, but make a small hole, then let it out slowly, as we have said.
And at the completion of the work, the patient appears to the surgeon with the head covered, in case he sleeps on his back in the dark limb.
And it is necessary for all movements, and feed light foods, and do not move the head to the right or left, and it should be aligned according to its natural position.
Then the patient lies in this dark room, and examines his eyes, and sees nothing, and then he resets the joint according to the ninth day.
And it is necessary that you do this in the surgeon's office or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the pain increases rapidly.
When the abscess is about to rupture, you should carefully remove the oil from before the ninth day, and address the one who is causing the abscess.
And when it is calmed down, remove the eye and place it in its socket to cover any day for as long as possible, and stay in that dark house.
And then leave the house quickly and convert into your case.
and advise that no disciple should enter this case. And some came to us who were from Yrach, who told us that in some places they made ointments for the fever, but we have never seen any of these in our land, nor have we ever read about them in the ancient books. And by chance, this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of maggots, because those who do not know them by sight.
and be true maggots properly. And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles acute.
Never are born or do not arise diverse kinds of fleas, because there are none that seem to be scorpions at the mouth of the feet.
and if they are of such or have an enhanced appearance of fleas with different colors, and if they are of bone color. In that case of these fleas which are of bone color and do not enhance, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun.
In that case of these fleas which are of bone color and do not enhance, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun. and works her nostrils, and greases the bones with those charms, and they are formed. then try to hold it with the subtle spray of a part, as long as you feel that the char is complete.
And if there is nothing left to try, then examine all the subtle and light secretions, so that it does not cause any harm. and if it does not overwhelm you, or cause an abortion, if the secretions are like this, then it is correct.
And if it is an abortion of malignant secretions, then apply the cauterization as soon as possible, and burn them until they are unstained and all the charms are turned, then grease or wet with wine. If it is not worked on, and moisture comes to the palace, it becomes unhealthy.
And if moisture penetrates not as it should, it causes harm, and the bones in the affected area may not grow properly, and the wounds may not be properly trimmed.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut the end of the thread with a little thickness, and it should be made of hands, and have an interval of at least one inch between each knot. And place the patient's head on the thread, and tie it as tightly as possible, and tighten it as much as possible, until it reaches the corner of the mouth.
For many times they make the child go to school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it.
Then hold the head that comes from the left hand and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and guide them one after the other in a straight line as we who are or are not do.
Do this as long as you know that the nail has corrupted this char, then take out the child, excrete the sand, and grease the child with Egyptian ointment, and put him back in the nose as before.
Do this three times or more, until the greased corrodes all that is made of char.
Then he puts on or takes off any necessary bandage as soon as it is dry, and if he has experience in herbal remedies, then he uses them.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, and it is used by distilling the oils and medicines or essences.
And it is made of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a lantern, and it is led in the same way.
And if you see, if I make a closed lamp to purge the head.
And it has a handle for the patient to hold while heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the chest, the wound
Many times it happens in the head of a child who is suffering from a disease called "telly" which grows and becomes large, as one can see when looking at it.
And that's why you should cut it at the beginning, and then put the hot iron or medicated ointment on it.
And if you delay cutting it as much as it is large, then if it is hard, with a rough color, and poor sensation.
If you do not cut it with iron because it is an infected wound, because if you cut it once, it will always cause great pain to the patient.
And if the patient holds their breath tightly, not due to fear but from pain, and you see that it can be covered completely if the patient is empty and the chest does not move, and the surgeon cures the patient of things that are loose and restraining.
It is said that when a solution for continued treatment comes from one of these cartilages, it does not benefit much, and this is true in no man's case.
It is necessary therefore to cut if there is no other way, if you look at the wound being fresh at all its depth. and then cut off the two lips with a stitch, and treat it as soon as it is safe.
And if the lips are already torn from both sides, it is necessary to scrape all parts of them as they heal, and then cut off the two lips with a stitch, and draw them together, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and incense the wound. And he puts powder on a piece of plaster or another kind of soft plaster, and leaves it until it has dried, then the treatment of ointment as soon as it is dry.
The method of sewing if you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal sewing; or by thread, as I have told you.
2. of the abscesses of the lips
At hands the gums of the incision are dense, resembling grains of sand, and smaller and larger.
However, you must turn the gums of the incision, and cut them each time on a different side, and take them with tweezers and close them in each part.
Then use the hand after the incision of hot needles, as long as they are not in pain.
Then use the other hand to dry the hand, and cure the hand with dry things as soon as it is healthy.
Many times on the thighs are found hard knots, which they call "albulus".
If it is necessary to hold it with your fingers, and the loop at its root, and leave the bow or the vein.
Then put on the hand hot needles or other restricting and desiccating powders.
And if that knot returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the loop second time, and cauterize. If there is no recurrence after the cauterization;
No times are assembled at the root of the teeth, the mouth is opened between the lips, and gums that are rough and thick are scraped. And never is the black and yellow tooth touched, until corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes pale.
If you must put the patient's head between your hands, and his chin in yours, and pull on the teeth or gums that are visible, until it does not hurt. and I make of black and green and yellow and the others ties, as they are wound.
and if it is at the first reason, it is good. if not, then return to the second reason and the third time, as long as you have everything ready.
and observe that the tooth has the ability to perform different forms of extraction according to what it demonstrates, because the raker that tightens the teeth has other shapes than the one that is between the teeth. and these forms and others are with you prepared.
It is necessary when you are treating the patient's tooth pain that you delay your treatment as much as possible, as it should not be done. for it is a substance high in juice, therefore there is no excuse for delaying treatment.
When the patient is constrained to rest, it may be necessary that you are certain about the tooth. Many times the pain of the patient is relieved, and make sure it is not a toothache, and treat the tooth root. and there is no further pain for this, as long as the patient is still suffering, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones.
and when you are sure of the tooth, if it is necessary to scrape the tooth all around, use a sharp tool to avoid damaging the gums of all parts.
Then the mustard has your duties or thin nails at the first poth and pit, as they are well embedded, then it firmly affirms the nails. and let the patient's head be in your sacred hands between your fingers, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After removing the tooth firmly with the pliers, and if it does not break, then take none of these springs and pull lightly on each part, and the tooth will move as you have done first.
And if the dressing is felt and mixed, then you must fill it with bandages, wherever the wounds are. And if the extraction is made subtly with nails, that it does not break during the extraction.
And it is necessary to wisely cover the thigh to remove the tooth.
And be well warned that you will not break the tooth, and there will remain a part, and it remains with the patient due to the malice of the root, causing greater pain in the first place.
And make sure you do not break any bones by following the advice of those who are ignorant of health, who through their haste and boldness never break a single bone, and they have never harmed anyone as we have counted.
but bring about never by the quinseness of that great disease through its roots which they endure, or by the bone they break, as we often want.
And when the gum is bleeding, wash the tooth with wine or vinegar and salt.
And if there is any evacuation of blood that often occurs, use the tooth with vitric acid.
And if this does not work, if the cauterization is performed.
The shapes of the fissures are, if the teeth are silent at first, long and wide, and they do not double when you pull the tooth.
And these are the shapes: And they should be of large size if they do not break when pulled, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be easy to hold.
of the root of the teeth When the root of the tooth is sore during extraction, if you can put your thumb on the lower jawbone as far back as possible, until the tooth is loose, then pull out the roots that are called "alveolar" teeth, or if the gums look neat;
And they should be made like a lime and it is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out through all these tines, then it comes that you remove the entire root, and insert the instrument called "athali," which is a type of saw, from either side, and its shape is as follows:
And so it is, and large if it does not break, and if its root jumps from this, it is good.
If not, then help from all the surgeons, and if the forms come after here:
And if you help with this instrument that has two rains, its shape is as follows: And other tools that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large tines, its shape is as follows:
And so it is, that the surgeons are strong enough to break it, and that the hands of the surgeons are not thick: and also other surgeons, who are not large enough:
And the skilled masters make subtle incisions by themselves with their instruments, according to what the wound and the disease demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the old did not teach any instruments for the diversity of us, and it does not break the chariot or other bones, or it pours, if you seek estructions that I have said, and help with gestures, according to the form here:
And let them be large and well-holding bones that do not slip, but can hold and firm.
Then restore the medicine suitable for this, and if there is fat in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument.
When the tooth appears not according to nature, and its form is deformed, and at the same time in women with sparse hair, it comes to pass that you should cut off the tooth before it grows, and it is not right in its place, and it cannot be soaked or made smooth.
and the root. If it is bitten with the tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like the small tooth, and it should be made of iron and be sharp:
And the coping is little by little in the hands for the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears to be formed like this one, then the lime of a part of the lime like this is formed:
and it should be made like the lark's beak.
and in the lark's beak, make the tooth a little and lightly in hands, so that it does not move until it grips.
Then smooth the end with any rough material, and if the teeth are too sharp and cut the tongue, then tighten the spicule as much as possible, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth before the gum, whether by percussion or by blowing, and the physician cannot press on it due to the swelling that it has, and you treat it with restrictive medicines, and it does not improve.
If the wound is restrained with a golden thread, because the silver threads turn green and become slimy, but the gold does not move.
And let the silver threads be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth advancing, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the misaligned teeth, if it fits, as many times as you can see progress in the healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume the covering just where you left off, and gently and wisely insert your hand, so that it does not move.
and make sure your finger is at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape.
Then sharpen the ends of the teeth with needles, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth and the gum, and put it in so that it does not hurt the tongue.
And then leave it as narrow as possible, and if it does not move, or the fangs turn, if it is pulled by another tooth.
If it delays and serves its purpose entirely, and this is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the second healthy teeth and the gums, as you see:
And when the tooth is lost, if it is replaced in its place, with fresh with fresh, as we have said:
and does not move once that it is not sharp and painful, and never takes the form of a bone tooth of a sheep, and it is placed in its place or where it lacks, and it is tightened on as we have said, and it lasts and serves as long as we have said, and does not cause any pain.
There is no instance where the tongue or nature comes out, that has been known to happen. or by chance of wounding;
and the openings are such that you can open the mouth of the midwife, and it has its head in your mouth, and it holds the tongue;
then take hold of the nervous and wide one, as long as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it does not stop or come out, and it is due to pain, then cut the lingual frenulum and take hold of the wide one;
and make sure the frenulum is not too short, for the artery that is out;
When you have finished, if you lift the leg of the red and swollen one or the cold one, then put a tent of linen on the tongue.
and the lesion of the patient every night, which he cannot read.
And if blood comes out, then put a hot vinegar on the leg. And if it is not healed, then use fire cautery on the wound that is slow to heal. Then continue with another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
And if you see that the wound has changed color or blackened or hardened, and it does not hurt the patient, if it is not touched, then it is gangrene.
If the shoulder is dislocated and it is moist, if it gushes blood, and they make a poultice of a subtle substance, and they deliver from one side and the other; and if it does not wane in your grip, if you put vitreous beads as soon as they are cooked, then return to your hold as soon as you have everything in order;
Then lift the head of the shoulder and the neck, and treat other treatments as soon as it is healthy;
of the throat's abscesses No time comes when the throat is called "godath", and they are properly called "hammers", and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healthy, then hold them;
If it is an abscess of hard texture and small size, and it is not touched with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, and it is not touched with iron, then also for the evacuation of blood. But let it remain until it is dead, and then you will leave it, or it will tear itself apart.
And if it is yellowish in color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first check if the abscess is healed and calmed.
And then place the patient in front of the sun, and their head should be in good condition, and they open their mouth and chew on the thong between their hands, and press the tongue evenly all over the instrument, so that its form is like this.
and let it be of silver or gold as fine as a needle's point:
Press the tongue to all this instrument, and see the aposteme, if you take the onion and the leaf in the antelope, and the thread will be longer than you think.
and take no thing from the tapestry with, then the copper to the instrument, of which it seems like some force. and the head is corked, and one part goes to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or copper.
And if you do not have this instrument present, if the cope has spikes, then its form is like this: And let it be turned over on one side and the other.
When you have seized one of the ankles, if you also seize the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, gargle the patient's mouth with hot, warm, and soothing water, and let them rest until the pain comes, if you gargle the patient's mouth with hot water, or cook the pome granates, or mirte fuelles, and similar things, as long as the patient is not chilled. Then continue the cure until it is healthy.
And no other abscesses ever appear in the throat except for the two ankles, if they are seized and treated like the two ankles.
And I treated a woman with a small-sensory wound that was in her throat, which means it was not serious.
and had closed almost the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked channel, and could not drink or urinate, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
And the wound was so high that it had been set with two incisions through the two holes.
I then operated, and found in the one the bone, then removed it, and took out a large portion of the bowel.
then removed another part from the other side, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue.
After cutting the gallbladder according to these instructions, and removing a part of it, and there will only be a small amount of blood. And the woman's throat is torn out, and she begins to drink water and then wine, and does not stop cutting at that wound for a long time.
And the wound healed over, and filled the empty joint that I had emptied for dinner, until it refused to take in anything large.
Therefore, I engaged and cauterized the throat: It did not take long to heal.
I will begin from these parts, and I will only make God do as I have done after me.
Of the urethra
When the woman comes down to the uterus, it is long and thin, and is called "perpendicular".
And if it is too large and round, it is called "uterus".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is subleased, then you can copy it.
And that which is round and assembled is not long. And it is blood or blackish-colored or black, then you can evacuate the incision. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is therefore, as you see, according to the manner I have said, of the woman's girdle and her age, that you should make the midwife stand before the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have made in front of it. Then clean the wound in the uterus, and cut the tissue, and the copper we have said in the incision of the two breasts.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the natural termination.
For if you cover more, you will grieve to the voice and to the speech.
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two thumbs, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
And if the patient has fear of pain, then you must use an engine for the fire cautery of the painful part.
And the manner of cautery is sharp and quick. And the patient should place his head on the device we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and then press the tongue with the instrument, and confuse it with hot vinegar if it is not too thick or too clear. and in using this instrument, of course, its form is:
And if the head has a hair or puts medicine, as the hair of a pin, and places the instrument at all the medicine under the eye.
When the patient has a dislocated shoulder, if the saliva and spittle flow from the mouth due to the medicine given, if it does not descend to the throat and chin,
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the wound, as much as you see the flow and the sting of the medicine is relieved;
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and tie the instrument with all the cotton in the gut, as much as the cotton sticks to the wound;
And do this as often as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and check after four or five days.
And if you are a practitioner of medical cauterization, if it reoccurs, and after the cauterization, cleanse the flesh around the urethra with a cork, and clean what is outside of the medical area.
And if it is inflamed with cold water, and be sure to use gargles as long as it is healthy.
This remedy is safer than the incision alone, just the cauterization.
If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take a lump of salt, pepper, oregano, rue, chamomile, and thyme, and mix them all together or any of them in one pot, and put on fire, and boil;
and it may be well stuck with strong earth, and if it does not hold, have an instrument made according to this manner: and it should be made of silver or gold, and one of the ends should be inserted in the patient's mouth as much as possible until the vapor rises through the nose, until the nose is numb.
after the vapor restarts often, until the nose is dry and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, as more things can come. and only do this when the onset of the abscess has declined.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and insert the head of the screw into a crack in the bone, if the mouth of the patient does not have too much pain. For the screw crack does not cause pain in the mouth, and it is a good cure together.
Many times it has happened in the throat, either an arrow or a fish spine, or nothing.
Therefore, if you must try this, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments, so that you see the thing.
And if it does not open you, then you must make the patient vomit, unless the meat is cooked in the stomach. If by chance the thing is done through vomiting;
or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of millet, or a morsel of dry bread; and then it binds to the sponge and then glues together; and when it comes to the shoulder, if it is loose, and then tighten and hold fast;
and if it does not come loose from what we have said, then use the instrument of thrust according to this form:
And let the instrument be hinged at the head if it can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head raised above. And be warned that if you do not touch the epigastrium, all will not survive, and neither should you overcrowd the bones.
And it is better that the patient and the tool be used, because it is needed or the thing is urgent. If the thing is not cut, or it is not pulled out evenly throughout the entire tool, as far as it goes.
of the throat of the mouth
Never has medicine been without its remedies, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines. And if this does not help, then look in the patient's mouth at the sun, then press the patient's tongue to the instrument I have given you.
If you see the lance, if it has all its small hairs, or if it has subtle needles that are worth this.
If it is not worth anything, then take a hair from the head, and put it in the mouth of the patient, then pull or cut the hair with the forceps, and do this often. And the patient's scalp is scabbed all over every day.
Then fill me with cold liquid, and operate on the mouth, and the throat feels like it's being swallowed, and it moves to my hand often. and if the tongue feels the cold liquid, then it is done.
And if it does not move as we have said, then the surgeon should submerge the mouth in asafetida powder using the instrument I mentioned during the fumigation of the urethra.
Do this many times, for it will feel numb.
And the manner of the fumigation is if you preign it or if there are charcoal bits, and it should be covered with a covering sheet in a clean place, and in that pertus the head of the instrument.
Then pour the fumigation on it, and the patient places the tip of the tail in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but goes into the wound.
And the wound will now hurt, and if it does not stop, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and acidic things, and does not drink water.
And therefore, this is the best way to relieve the patient according to this government.
And the shape of the instrument with which you treat the wound, if it can be seen, resembles combs that can enter the mouth. And it seems like a tool for the beak of care, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it touches, it cannot hold.
The appearances of abscesses are, according to which memory comes after one another in this book, and they are different in perforation and size.
And it is in two ways that one is itself in its appearance, and because it is moist.
And the second way is by the hands or when they are at the core.
For the wounds of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the wounds on the face are different from those that come in joints, and each person will have their own judgment in the work.
And if an abscess does not have to be measured, as long as the bowel is dead according to its completion.
If it is of such a kind that one must perceive when they are about to be born, and they do not die until their completion, as if amputations of joints.
For when wounds come from joints, and they are left as they are until they are fully healed, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
If the amputation is of the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
If it is of the foundation, then if one does not pierce when it is dead, it will harm the foundation.
And it is only necessary to pierce the amputation when it is thought to be complete with digestion, as if the foundation, which would not harm the principal member, would not be cut off, and would be long-lasting, and a fistula would be formed. and cannot be cured in a long time.
And it is necessary that you suture the wound of the abscess that is inflamed according to its completion, and when the pain is relieved, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and the healing of the wound, and the debilitated condition and ague of the abscess, and the other signs.
and it is necessary that you check the wound or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens.
and if the wound is long and deep, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and arteries, and in some places there is no plastering. In those cases, according to the member, they.
And when an abscess is in the flesh, if it is large, you should leave the puncture as long as it is confirmed in digestion completed, as we have said.
For if you do not heed this, then the heart will be far from you, and it will be bitter to despise excrement. and by chance they harden their lips and make them more beautiful for him.
And if there is no abscess that is punctured according to the large corse, according to the member, which the members can bear.
And it is necessary that you use small incisions, small punctures. and in large incisions, large punctures, and numerous furrows according to the appearance of the size of the incision.
and if there are such incisions or they must be made deep, and covered. When it has become as soft as I am, and is worn out, then it is necessary to do as we do with bubbles.
If it is of those that are cut at three angles, and if it is of those that are coped as the thorn of the myrtle, and like the gouts of angers.
And if it is of those that are made in a single cut, and others in different sizes and shapes.
Those who do not have a head, if the cut is superficial like an abrasion, then it must be pierced gently.
And when the cut is large and has a thick bow, and it pierces, if you do not draw all the bow in that hour, but draw a part. Then comes the aposteme, just like the other day, and no proper thing is done. I do this again and again, as long as the bowel is full.
However, if the man is of weak will, or a woman carries, or eats pets, or old men are in decay. For the expectoration there is no time with the end of the bowel, that by chance dies the patient, and you do not know it.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived the aposteme, if the wound bleeds, and look at whether the wound of the aposteme is small. And if it is a flat one, then use linen or cotton threads. And if it is many abscesses, and he has a fever, then you should make tents in each one so that they do not meet against each other.
And if you have treated an abscess with some leather, and it has healed, then you should fill it with fine cloth or the rough side of a linen cloth that is not moist, and the limb will be well.
Then the bone, and the care of the ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if the evacuation of blood occurs in your work, if it is cold and wet, and you become dizzy, and then your arm hangs down, and you must hold it in place many times.
And if the patient persists in losing blood, and he has good governance and care, and the powders I mentioned in my hands are in this book, and if it is not feverish, and the abscess is painful, then you should make tents and drape them with wet cloths soaked in wine and olive oil.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. If this is the case, and the patient's skin is wet, either with water or olive oil, or wine and olive oil, as we have said before, then...
And then remove the stitch and the pus, if necessary, as soon as it is healthy.
And this is how to completely understand all treatments for sutures:
Or have you been told what to do before the treatments for sutures, and then read this chapter.
When the heads of many abscesses come and are like ours, as if it were a grape, and they have similar appearances.
It has thick and long hairs or hair, and it is moist as well as that of a pig.
And if they are thick and rough at the haircut, and there is no doubt that it will not hurt, then it does not matter.
And the cutting of the size if it is that you spree with all the instruments called "entronomer", whether the form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they are made by cutting too long.
And when the moisture is seen, it is better to shave the hair that contains the moisture, because it will return to its place when left alone.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present. If not, use warm and wet, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day. And when one comes across something that is not well known.
And then the cotton begins again, as before, the second day, and the limb, as long as you see that it does not cause pain all night.
Then, treat the wound with ointment according to what is convenient, as long as it is healthy.
And if the abscess holds fat, then the graft according to this form, long. And if your bones get wet, and scar all over, and put all of your care in drawing the dressing for the wound where it grows.
If the artery is pushed against it, then I will do what I have said after this.
2. And if the aposteme is too tight, and it is cut and treated as I have said.
3. And the tailor makes the aposteme too tight and wet, if it is lighter, because there are not many veins. And if in any of these abscesses or gashes, and of these that I have cut from an old woman's thigh;
and found the abscess like a gash, sharp and sore, and could not be cut; and if we had made no abscess, we would have made a wound as good as a gash;
In other abscesses coming, let these which come from the children and roots of the ears be opened as soon as possible, for it is the most dependent part of the body, to relieve the belly;
and they cure as it is fitting.
There are often times of abscess at the collarbone, and the screws come loose, and the wounds, and never any other part is hurt, and they heal, and one bone is joined to another.
And every scrofula is properly located on its side, just as the wound and the abscess are on the cheek, as we have said. and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. The patient has to remove the items that contain moisture, and if they are not willing to follow the advice for health.
in the one that you see in good arrangement at the temple, and is similar to the color of the cheek, and uniform in all parts and is not rough as nerves are, nor in the artery nor in the conductor, and is not rough.
if you decide to cut it with scissors, and burn in every part, and the lips are like claws, if you can handle it, as we have said about the cheek.
And the tailor makes it small and small, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and not to tear, that the hands do not slip, and do not see too far ahead, that you do not cut more than you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol or some powders that stick to the wound, or any poultices that stop bleeding, and pull the wound; and let it be as long as the swelling is relieved and the wound is softened, and perspire.
When the dislocation is not reduced, if it returns to your care, as soon as you manage to reduce it.
Then wonder if your patient suffers from a few small scrofula, such as the cope and the mund.
And if the patient has a root cause of the scrofula being large, then you must only remove that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and leave it to hang, without causing any harm.
Then use the wound of fine cotton plunged in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
If you cover the entire wound, it is necessary to assemble the two lips of the wound, and then sew now, before there is no excess due to the size of the wound. If you understand how to cover the root of it, and cut it off, and sew it as we have said.
If you understand how to cover the root of it, and cut it off, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofula that hold superfluity, if they are pressed or cut open, will die.
And the point is like the one previously mentioned, depending on it, then try different treatments with care and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is being saved from corruption. And when the wound is well-healed, if the cure with ointment causes scarring, as long as it is healthy.
The ancients said and spoke of the lengthening of the neck. But I have never seen anyone do this in our world, and it is the scripture of their words.
To those who have squinting, it is necessary that the fenestra of the neck called "epiglotis" be avoided. And none can help this one because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected by those who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the groin.
When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it with three or four small incisions, passing through the two circles or along the quantity of the incision, and not into the cartilage.
And they see that it is not possible to cut the epigastrium without causing pain, and the veins are long and difficult to find.
If the masters are unable to handle it, then it comes to extending the neck skin to all the bones, then cutting as far as it reaches the cheek. And avoid the veins of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the skin, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the swollen cheek that it was forced to jump by the shoulder that was broken, and due to the lack of voice.
And leave the wound overhanging a piece.
And when the hour has passed, if it is doubted that the extraction is not possible, gather the two lips of the wound as far as the cheek, and cut through until you feel the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make the patient healthy.
Albucasim says that nothing should be done until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is near death, and the lack of air is severe. Then keep the epigastrium warm because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and it is kept alive.
And because the ancients advised leaving the wound overgrown until the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four, they then ordered to suture and dress the wound, as soon as it was dressed.
And I will tell you what I see. I see that a maiden was cutting her hair, and she had parted the front of her hair, and took some of the dark curls.
I was called to cure him, and I found him already dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that flowed from it, and although she did not have any veins or lead the way but only the gore, it was due to the wound.
I hurried, and saw the wound, and cured it as soon as it was healed.
and she did not come to the damsel until she was red of voice, and returned afterwards to her place.
because I say that in the tailoring of the epigastric there is no pain.
These hernias are called "throat hernia" and are large hernias of the color of a yarn, and are very common in women.
and there are two ways to treat it: 1. The first sentence translates to: "When a bone is fractured due to an accident or injury.
2. The second sentence translates to: "Nature has no mechanism for healing such injuries.
3. The third sentence translates to: "Injuries can occur in two ways: either they resemble large wounds, or they are similar to amputations that come from arteries. 4. The fourth sentence translates to: "If there is no bleeding, and it is not possible to stop it with a small forceps, the surgeon should look for an alternative method. 5. The fifth sentence translates to: "If the surgeon cannot stop the bleeding with a large forceps, and it does not stop, just like when we cut ourselves, the wound should be cleaned thoroughly, if necessary. 1. And he cuts well throughout, and the cure is done as it should be, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
1. There are many ways to us, which I will describe all the appearances.
1. and it is necessary that I make a clear distinction between wound and dislocation.
1. I say that dislocation is inflammation and fever holding, as long as the ebullitions have passed and the secretion has been accomplished. 1. And then the fever and inflammation rest.
1. With the wound having no inflammation, fever, or pain, and containing ichthyin, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the corset, and becomes like a pimple, and becomes large.
1. They are according to two appearances, either sharp or blunt, or moist, and of different colors, as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you examine and first inquire about all the instruments called "entromissoire" according to what appears in the chapter after the work.
2. The manner of incising the abscesses of the nose is that you prick it more with your finger than with a needle, and turn your two fingers often until you feel that the skin has given way, then that is according to the size of the abscess;
3. Then draw out the entromiser, and hold tight until it gives way;
4. If the abscess is moist, cut it according to its color, as I said about other abscesses;
After the entrenchment, if there is no moisture, it is fat and if you make it a cross, take it with pliers, and lightly scrape each part and wipe the wound with the nail;
and if you do not make it clean, if you take it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
For if nothing comes out, it will return to us many times.
And if it drains a pouch, and does not grieve you, use the wound with some corrosive powders, close the wound, and put soothing ointments on the incision, and cure other wounds as long as it is healthy.
If it is large, then we will cut the two lips of the wound, and treat the one who is causing the pain.
If the vein is battered and it is against or otherwise, if you hasten and use the leech of vitriol broth, and leave it for II to III hours, as long as the wound is burning, and rest the inflammation of blood; Then return to the compass that it is not too much out.
See the forms of the entangled protrusions, and are of three kinds: large and moldy and small.
and there are three kinds that are called "alabar" and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: To prevent dislocation, one must first grasp the head of the shoulder with a firm grip, using a small movement to avoid causing further injury. This is done to securely hold onto the fistula's openings.
They are similar to the beaks of birds, which are counted in gold, silver, or copper, and are more valued if they are yellow, and are more skilled at grasping the fistula openings than black ones.
They come in three different ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the abscess.
The shapes of the tumors are quite varied, as you can see here:
The second sentence translates to: "And if there are those who have two eyes of three kinds?
The third sentence translates to: "And if there are those who have three eyes and they are of three kinds?
The fourth sentence translates to: "And if there are those who have two eyes and one eye only, and they are of three kinds?
The fifth sentence translates to: "And these are necessary for their healing.
The sixth sentence translates to: "The head of these we make very sharp, and such ones are those that cannot cut through flesh, because one does not touch the vein or the nerve.
and of these intramuscular injections, the aliments are returned in handcuffs, so that the patient does not escape from the opening of the abscesses.
and there are three ways: great, small, and slow, as you see;
but only use them in the joints of the legs, arms, and hands, and the fingers, and in similar places;
and no other instrument is ever made that resembles the forceps of scissors, according to this form, and it is not cut: and it is placed on none at all times in the shoulder that can withstand the pressure of the veins and arteries, and never returns to this great form:
No time have the hands of some men swollen when they are in great pain, as if they were hands of women:
1. And the lame and swollen ones, and those who see them cured, if they come to agree with this form of this line: b. until g:. 2. Then scorch the fat, and apply the wound with a hot needle, then stitch the lips of the wound as close as possible, and cure it until it is healthy.
3. And if the wound is inclined, and is widened for its growth, as it is in women, if they are made into stitches, through the similar twists. 4. And if one holds onto the other at the end of each and every one, if the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, up to this line g. until g. Then the skin that is between the second lips is burned, and the fat is removed, and what we have said about sewing and powders is carried out, and what is necessary for the cure, as long as it is healthy.
And if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not rest, or due to the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And leave it as long as it drains the discharge and fat, then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
The abscesses that come from the horseshoes are made of hard scrophulous or have corners, and they contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, along the line .b., and then along the line .g.: And when all the bone in the abscess is visible, use a piece of clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat with ointment as needed until it is healthy.
When the patient's response resembles scabs, if it is like we have said in our descriptions of scabs, and the wound is not deep, then apply a cauterization as we have described before.
When the artery is pricked, and the blood flows out, if it happens many times, and also the vein bleeds;
and if the patient has pain when it is the artery, if it pricks the vein; and if you feel pain in your hand, if you hold it steady;
and if it is for the vein, if it is pulled out;
and it is madness to stop the bleeding, and at the same time when it is loosened and the bands and buttons are broken and the guts and the inside of the body, and it is greatly hurt; It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is made of entangled arteries by being cut through the skin long.
Then work the size as the bones, and beautifully cut the artery of the tendons, as much as it is discovered.
Then sew it with a needle, and make it pierce on the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in it, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then, if the leg that is between the second and third joints of an instrument is not released when it is inserted, and there is no dislocation, then release the abscess.
Then, if the cure does not fit well enough to hold the bow, then... Then, if the cure is applied to this wound, then...
And if the abscess is large enough to cover the vein, then... do this: grasp the abscess with your hand, remove it from the limb you are holding in your hand, and cut the thread with the other hand, and make sure there are two strings, so that you take it off from the other side; Then tie the suture, if I may, or one of the two parts of the second part of the two heads of the hair.
And if you doubt that the threads will not hold, then replace another needle at the end of all the thread and draw out the threads through all the sutures at the first needle's end, and draw them tight in four places.
Then pull the suture as much as the excess will allow, then pull the excess from the end and leave what is left.
Then apply a wet cloth to the wound and oil it, and treat it with tent boards and bandages as much as it is necessary.
When the fire cautery is instructed to the patient, apostes come from the artery and vein, come apostes from nerves when they are too tight or due to excessive work, and similar things occur.
And this often happens with helpers and you must do it in all joints, and it is an injury, and its color resembles the color of a wounded heart, and it is more commonly found in positions that cause pain.
And when it is held steady, if it feels pain, and it is not from a wounded heart but from the curvature of the neck, then...
And it remains still for all purposes, and does not move before or after, nor is it dislocated, and the one who is in joints cannot be moved without force. by chance, it may contract. And the one who is head or face, makes the hide at the stump.
And the one who is head or face, makes the hide at the stump. If the abscess is small, and it is held with nails, and the poultice is applied to its root.
And if it is large, and the gout spreads to the bone, and the flesh burns, then the bone assembles the wound at the seam, and the cure is done as soon as it is healthy.
There is no time in the womb and does not affect any other part, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance, and it is at the root, and the head is large.
and it has small and large ones.
and I have seen one who had them in his belly, and the ones that were more like fungus than anything else, and they had no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were sharp, and they corroded and turned moist.
I found them and weighed one XVIII ounces, and the other VI. The incisions are made if you look at whether the bones are moist, and the color of the tool is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root. If the chisel is used on the larger bone, and it is in your presence, then perform the fire cautery.
If the chisel is used on the larger bone, and it is in your presence, then perform the fire cautery. For the mason comes often too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not want to cauterize, then you must cauterize.
And if you see the tool spreading and coming out of the incision, then take a piece of thread well made, and tie the tool as we have said, and leave it alone.
Then comes the restraint, and do not stop straining the rope as long as it holds the anchor, and check it by its sense of work.
And if the roots are large, if it is not painful in the belly, but you hold it well on both sides, then burn it so it does not regrow.
Then treat the wound, and hold the throat which is of rough touch, dark color, and poor sensation, and cold liquid.
For these are enchanted ulcers, and I will come to treat this sore after.
When the gout is severe When the appearance of the bowels comes from cauterization of the wound or cutting of sauce, and it is under the belly and in some of the bowels, if as in other cases, or of sweat which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventositeit.
And if it is due to the rupture of the skin and the exit of pus, if the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the heart, and it is a light thing that causes pain, and has multiple exits. When it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, if it returns, and by chance if it becomes swollen, and enlarges at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is light and opens well when you press it with your hand; do not constrain it.
And if it is due to blood, it opens if the aposteme is large and hard, and is torn according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to varicose veins, if it swells at the base, and the vein appears to be due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or varicose veins.
And if it is due to varicose veins, if it swells at the base, and the vein appears to be due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or varicose veins. If it comes to pass that you allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of cauterizations for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is from the intestine or the anus, then it comes that you command the patient to touch his tail, and it should be stretched all around, then spread throughout the entire feces. Then command the patient to hold their breath between your hands, then draw the limb you have set aside throughout the entire joint, then half of the abscess is located at the end of the large muscle. Then draw it through a strong thread or a firm cord, or it will be difficult to remove.
Then work the half of the abscess stretched on the thread, and you will find your indication, and it indicates the intestine. If you catch the dislocation, if it does not stay in place, and cut into the intestine through the abdomen.
And if you catch the dislocation, if it is caught in the hip, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery is torn against, or the vein, if it comes out easily, then return to your work and take two hooks, and cut the two ends as you think you will see.
Then stain the abscess with four leeches, and if you see, take out the leeches, and let the wound remain as long as it bleeds, and the dead flesh will fall off. If you catch it when it is subtle and perforated, then the treatment of what it causes, and keep the wound clean as we have said.
If you catch it when it is subtle and perforated, then the treatment of what it causes, and keep the wound clean as we have said. and remove the blood or mucus that you draw, then clean the wound of what it covers, and dry the wound.
The translation of "dou chancre We have said in the division about the appearances of a gumma, and commented that one should oversee by means of drugs, and commented that one must use iron for the cure.
And let us say that the gumma is formed in the marsh, and great caution is required in its cure, and they tell the ancient that when gums are in the leg or cannot be removed if it is like a gum in the mammillary glands, and in the crevices, and in similar places, and it must be treated throughout until it is at the beginning.
No one has ever been healed before me.
And the wounds, when they are in the body or can be opened, as we have said, is that you never cleanse the surgeon with black collar;
Then make it healthier if it has clearly overflowed, then cut the surgeon with the knife to make the wound;
then your bones or gums will become wet, and all the hair will leave, and the bone will leave nothing left;
and leave the blood flowing freely, and hold the wound tightly in your hand or at nothing, and if they dislocate the blood makes it opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, if the cauterized so that the without being stained. then the second treatment as soon as it is healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de We have said in the division of the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one should not touch iron in these two appearances: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing;
therefore, when you treat this condition of ydropsis called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not help, if you look at whether the patient's constitution is weak, or if there is another disease than ydropsis, then like all other stomach and similar things; if one does not touch iron, because it has doubt;
and if you see the patient is of great constitution, and has only ydropsis, and is not too young nor too old, then it is necessary to oversee: 1. Gently place the patient's shoulder in your hands, and apply firm pressure to the abdomen at the lowest part of the hip, then take the spatula with this form: And then comes the second sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like 2. Point the spatula and make a small incision if it goes in but not far enough to reach the intestine when you remove it, and do not bleed.
3. Then look to see if the dislocation is towards the intestines: 4. If you must cut through the skin, do so directly above the bone, not too far to the side. 5. If the dislocation is due to liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the bone.
If it is due to muscle tension, and it is on the left side, and only the surgeon's skill can straighten the shoulder that the superfluities do not flow towards the weak part of the body.
Then, pierce all the hide with the instrument, and the blade, and gently press your hand on every part of the skin between the hide and the face as if scraping with the quantity of an nail or an entree.
Then, pierce the face as far as the skin is pulled towards the shoulder, and it is the axe that cuts, then the thread is removed, and this instrument is of the form like this. And it resembles a silver needle, and is of lead or light iron, and in its part closest to the tip, there is a small pore. and sometimes costs on one part, three pores. and two more parts, and one more.
and it is cut like a pen point, and it is in the shape of the incision that the scribes make for the pen.
at the head of the shoulder is the aliment, so that when it is tightened, if the instrument comes to the edge, then it should now be inserted with the instrument.
if you see that it is not enough to fill the third part, because if you see more than it should in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or if he has palpitations, or if he approaches death.
But according to its quantity of virtue, and according to the dispositions of the virtue of the patient's shoulder, and his pulse.
Then take the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the heat that is on the pulse that was under the scarlet fever which I spoke of, because I want you to do it this way.
Then continue the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small amount of needle.
Do this every day, and keep yourself from twisting as much as you can, but only a little needle.
If you doubt the patient's condition and leave them in doubt, if the cure of the grave or sandbank is affected, and by means of drinking or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes hot; and the use of drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterization on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the worms, as I have said before.
No child is ever born without having a pustule in the growth, or if it is small, or if it is not present in its root.
If the patient insists so much that they cannot perceive any slight subtlety according to this form:
Then put or sew a small stitch under the cloth, and tie and cut in three or four days or eight, and if it sees that it is passing urine, then if it is closed, make urine, and then put it back.
and by chance they do not cover it, because the urine that comes out is not closed.
If the part where the swelling is small, if it is treated with a piece of cloth as described, as we have said, if it expands.
Those who do not have the purse in their thigh are bleeding, because no one has ever had the purse at the top of the thigh, for they cannot urinate before they cut off their thigh. and cannot ejaculate because the matter does not come out quite to the end, and it is a very bad disease.
And the way of the work is that if the patient cries on his back, it is the thigh of the thigh and the cut is as big as the size of a penis, if the purse is cut, so it should be.
And keep away from blood loss that comes often, and if it happens, if the wound is infected, and treat the wound as soon as it is healthy.
Pustules of the throat. Often come to the throat, and it appears as a bad appearance;
and in some are malicious and not malicious;
If you want to burn them in the subcutaneous fat, and cut and clean all, then put fine cotton in Egyptian ointment; Then the care of ointment diagnosis as soon as it is healthy.
And if the boil is malignant, with a dark color and painful, then you must use cauterization.
When you have closed it, and the skin is still wet, and has parts of hair and parts bare, if it comes that you need to reopen it. And when it is dry, if the cure is done.
For when you close it together, if you do not secure the skin of the wound that it is not perceived, and darkness and corruption come to the skin of the wound and on its edges.
If all that is black and corrupted comes out, then apply honey and flour made from the scraps of green peaches and vines, then continue with other treatments as it becomes healthy.
And if the blood flow stops, then follow this form of the fire cautery:
1. The fire cautery can help with these positions: 2. It is known to help with the evacuation of blood and corruption.
3. If the head of the shoulder is corrupted and needs to be reinserted, it is best to hold onto the verge with one hand and use a noose with the other to pull it back in, and if necessary, release the pain with urine.
4. If the hairs of the head of the shoulder grow towards these who have not been circumcised, or those who have been injured or castrated, then it is necessary to scrape them off with the instrument, as long as the hair is loose and the head of the verge is released from all parts.
and if this is a difficult matter to devise, then it comes that you scarify it with a spatula of no particular size of the hair and the beard.
Then apply a element between the two, and I put a fine cloth of wool that is cold and moist on it, so it does not stick.
Circumcision is not the most difficult wounds to continue if they are like the others. whenever we do this work of our will, and in truth as children, if it is the best work that we can do, and the lighter for health.
I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
For I want the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions on the male child, and they had force, and at all ages.
If it were possible to cut the hair, and by chance if one cuts more than is necessary, and then one cuts more to make up for it. Or they may return, and there is great pain, and at circumcision which is not surely done on the point of the painful member.
And at the circumcision of the penis by chance the iron escapes, and cuts the urethra, and many times are born without any means of circumcision, and I want it.
Of the circumcision made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut both the good and the bad equally.
For when you press your hand, if it fits evenly in its place, but that the fingers be well tightened around the glove.
and if the manner is first, as if the child understands, that you only tighten the thread around the glove, and then I will do it in all the ways you please.
Then I will do it straight between your hands, and repost the strengths between your hands or out of your fingers that the child does not see, nor any of the strings.
Then hold your hand to the glove and blow or suck, and pull it up as long as the head of the glove is not in place. 1. Then clean well the waste that is assembled, 2. then tie the leg with a double thread, 3. then tie it loosely to the other line.
1. Then clean well the waste that is assembled, 2. then tie the leg with a double thread, 3. then tie it loosely to the other line. 1. Then tie it with the second thread to the pouch and the indicator, 2. place it between the two loops, 3. then gently pull on the handle quickly and cut the end of the thread. 1. Then leave the vein loose for a moment, as it is evil. 1. Then put powder on it and on the powder, 2. then cut a piece of bread and dip it in cooked meat broth that has been cooled with rose water, olive oil, and salt, 3. then place it on the other side, and care for it as long as it is healthy.
The form of the forces at the mundification if this is:
The heads should be thin and even, and as strong as the right hand consistently.
The error of mundification if it is when the teeth come out at the incision.
Therefore, you must stretch it to your nail, unless the tooth causes apoplexy.
And the crown should be even, and if you do not hold it to your nail, then the crown will have sharp points, and then the crown.
And if they exceed three years, and what is out of order is bent, if it is left until the apoplexy is calmed, and lightly burned.
If the copse is as you say it is, and you keep hold of the part of the bark, it will not harm you.
Cure the joint of things soft wounds with powder, which we have said or treated as powders, and if it does not heal quickly, it will become worse, unless it is helped.
Cure the wound as we have said, until it is healthy.
The second line of the text translates to: "Hold back the urine.
The retention of urine if it is of opiliation of the urethra, or of sanguination of the incision, or of bowels, or of cholestatic jaundice, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra which is at the hip or the neck of the bladder, then it comes to pass that the patient's health is endangered. And it is placed on the back and extended over the abdomen from the part below the back, and the patient's pain is limited as much as possible. And therefore the lower abdomen is constrained to the expression of the urethra below, because the urine is discharged.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it comes to pass that you administer an extraction of all the instrument called "syringe", and its form is.
and let silver subtly lighten the hair, as if it were the tail of a swallow. and let the girth be that of a palm tree of long and half, and let it be lightened at the root.
And the manner of the urine's exit if it is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the root of the hair or linen, and cut the root of the hair with a double thread of silk.
and cut the superfluity of the hair and tie the root of the thread with the thorn of the ring, then anoint the ring with oil or balsam and ointment of urine and olive oil and German tea, and make the patient sit on the seat and the verge of the bladder wet and oiled and ointed with olive oil and German tea.
Then gently place the thread at the edge, as it reaches the root of the leaf, then fold the leaf inwards towards the vein.
Then pull the thread before it reaches the vein, and feel the patient's pain when it comes into contact with the empty thing, and this is done according to this order because either the guide or the patient will be harmed.
Then the thread is pulled through all the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then it is drawn out and the urine is made up.
And repeat the thread as soon as the vein is empty and the patient is healed.
When scald or blood comes into the bladder, or when there is purulent discharge and you see water and medicines being distilled, then make sure to cleanse all the instrument called "clepsieder", and it is in this form:
The woman is closed, and if there is third degree burns: If one part is second degree and the other first degree, as you see.
And the patient feels better because the corticosteroids are such that they make the wound feel well without addition, if one can treat the moisture and bind when necessary.
And when you see your medications in the bladder, put the head of the castor oil in the moisture and take the one who is nearest.
If you take the moisture with castor oil and then tightly bind the one who is nearest. If the moisture enters the bladder and comes to the urethra now, if the patient feels it.
And it is the form of a subtle cauterization where one cauterizes the uterus:
And it is of silver or gold, and it is at the head;
and it is not used on the skin or the lips;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you have seen cauterized on it, then place it between the two breasts to form a double-walled tube, and heat that moisture over the fire;
Then cut the subtle cauterization in the edge, then hold your hand on the bladder as much as the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
And if you do not have a vessel, then take a piece of sponge, and make a circle, and drill it round the hole. Then force the thick wire through these wounds, then assemble the circle as we do with a nail, and fill it with oil, water, and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument.
And make it as you made the vessel, pressing with your hand until the water reaches the vessel.
The first sentence to translate is: "Car en
We have said in the division of the ways of incising, and the assembly of medicines.
And I have said the difference between the incision in the leg and the other signs, and in what size we should over it. and in the bladder and the gullet;
and I will tell you openly and thoroughly.
I say that the pierce in the bladder that often occurs in children is a sign that the inflammation of the bladder has passed and is now subtle.
and if it opens the gullet, and grates the gullet, and it can be done many times, and then it becomes inflamed. and at the mouth of these frequent pierces.
and the treatment of children is light until they are four years old, and it is bitter in the belly, and it is as bitter as gall, for those who are between the belly and the stomach.
And the cure is less severe for those with large wounds than for those with small ones.
When we come to the cure, if we first clean the patient with chalk, we will treat all the feces that are inside the intestines. For it never presses on the wound.
Then take the patient upright and move them to the bed, if the wound descends to the anus, and does not once rise above the groin.
Then place the patient in your hands, with their hands below their knees, if the anus is all inclined downwards.
Then cut the cloth and touch it.
If you feel the wound in the process of cutting, stop immediately and re-cut the wound.
If she does not touch anything at all, if your index finger is wet with oil from the left hand, or if it is dirty, then the patient's hand is misshapen. And the bone in its base, and wants to pierce, and when you feel it with your finger, if the pain is at the top of the thigh.
Then press with your finger, and the bone in its base, or where you see it being cut.
And instruct the minister to press the thigh with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand with the fingers upwards, and with his left hand to grasp the bone that is exposed at the site where the cut was made.
Then he binds the splint, but if it is not firm, then this is its form. And they make between the one who is between the coils and the foundation, not in the environment but at the cost of the right side of the nape.
And it should be above the incision, and your hands should be either on the foundation or at the root, and the tail should be wide enough so that it is not too large, and the stitching should be tightened, according to the size of the incision, not too many.
by chance the pressure if the one who is at the foundation, that it jump for work.
and you check if it has a piece of piercing or angles, and margins: If it is gripped to exit;
And if a part that is wet appears as a gland, it swells, and its exit is light.
If a celi therefore has angles and margins, make the size larger.
And if it does not stick, then you must hold the needles that are like a nail at the head, and pull on them until the piercing does not slip. Or if you break the instrument sharp spur at the head.
And if you do not break it in, then open the loosened part and if it is not cracked, then pull on it with vitriol.
If there are more punctures, if the first one is the largest at the top of the bladder, then cut it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones if they have more.
And if it is left large, it will become greater, and cause a larger wound. For two things come to the patient: If it dies or the urine comes out through the urethra because the one who reads cannot hold it in.
But try to draw or cut it with nails, as much as you can draw it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, if you use the wound of cinnamon and aloe and dragon's blood, and stretch it, and wrap it with soft cloth in oil and vinegar, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the stinging pain; Then wrap the patient's neck with a cloth, and do not let the tie slip from the jaw.
When you dislocate it, if the joint is well lubricated with oil and sage, then apply the ointment of finicking and basil, until it is healthy.
And if aphthae appear in the wound and corrosions, and the blood vessels in the vein are frozen, and this is due to the retention of urine, which is held in a certain way that does not cause it to rise with the urine: Then bind your thigh in the wound, and extract the blood, because if it remains, it will flow into the vein, and cause inflammation.
Then lift the wound of the head and neck, and help it in all ways that you know, as long as it is healthy.
And make sure that all the remedies you use, that you bind the thighs, and gather the medicines at the knee.
If the prick is small, and it is conducted by the finger, and it is felt, and the urine cannot be discharged. If the cure I am giving does not help, you should measure it many times, this is an exception to the size of this cure. I already have this proof in mind.
I will prepare to follow this form and make it at a 30-degree angle on the first side.
Then take your finger and press it on the other side of the prick, so that it does not go into the bladder.
Then gently bite the skin on the other side of the prick until it reaches the prick. and turn the bite in your hand at the prick as often as you can feel the prick from the other side.
If much urine comes, then press your hand on the part that is becoming loose due to the piercing. If it breaks, and falls with the urine, and the member becomes tight.
And if you do not manage to do this for anything, then cut off the end of the piercing and the other, then make the wound end where the piercing is between the two ligaments, then it will come out, and cut off the remaining ligament, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound. And treat it as soon as it is healed.
of the women's incision
1. A wound comes when a piercing is infected in women, and if it has never happened, it is due to the grief of the surgeon, and is defended by three things:
1. One is that by chance the woman is virgin;
1. The second is that it is not often found a woman well-bred who has been disfigured by wounds, even when she is young;
1. And the third way is that if by chance one cannot find a woman well-bred in this art of hands;
1. And the fourth way is that if by chance the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it requires a more perfect size, and great pain it causes. And if it becomes necessary to set it, then choose a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, then cut it yourself, and if you cannot cut it, then do not cast the woman in shame;
The present sentence describes a wise practice for women in life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command in the investigation of the wound. and look well if the woman is virgin.
and look well if the woman is virgin. and it is necessary to put her in her place or foundation and seek the wound.
and if she is pregnant, if she is constrained to lose her place, and the midwife recommends that she put her in her place or cut with the knife, and wants and presses her left hand on the vesica.
If she is pregnant, if it is necessary to move her great by little by little from the entrance of the vesica until she reaches the root of the thigh.
Then follow the incision at the root of the thigh, in the damp environment, where it is most likely to be found, and it feels the pain in that area. and does not move its two dogs from the wound or the hole, and is of small size at first.
and does not move its two dogs from the wound or the hole, and is of small size at first. Then cut off the skin in that size, if you feel the wound so tight that the hole can be pushed out, and know that many ways of holes exist.
This is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and curved, and those that have joints.
If you wish to know the appearance to know the outcome.
And if you do not want to kill it, then put glass beads in the wound, and hold it for an hour until it is not inflamed.
Then return to your work, until the wound is healed, and have bandages as I told you in the extraction of the piercing to help you in your work.
And if it does not heal, and it is the artery that is covered, then take the powder on the shoulder and stretch it out many times, and do not continue this, and leave the wound and do not touch it, as a chance the patient may die. Then treat the wound.
When the pain from the wound is alleviated and you read it, if it returns to your care, as long as the wound is not fully healed.
Wet dressings are nothing more than assemblies of moisture or white soap, which are made from the urine of the cow, which contains the urea.
And is called "si fac," and never properly in the thread of the eye, if one takes care that it is not another tool; and it is the white skin between the "si fac" we have mentioned;
and there was nothing else. And the generation of this ramification if it is faulty that comes as coins, and it is expanded that matter.
And never does it come from percussion on the skin, and this moisture is of many colors; or it is declining color to jaune, or without red, or black, or white water, and this comes more;
and these are the signs to conclude this assembly, for if it is white "si fac" we have mentioned, then the wounds are long if they look like that of an eye, and it does not open the pores, because it has moisture everywhere;
If it has moisture in its own cloth, if the wound is cleaned with a piece of the udder, and for this they think it is other ointments.
And if the moisture is between the hide of the thighs and the white suet, it is well perceived.
Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, if it is sprinkled throughout the introducer, because it is formed in front of you. According to what comes after the cautery, judge which one is denser.
And when we cut with iron, it comes to pass that the patient is healthy according to our power and the fullness of his chest.
Then the sow on its back, with something high on one side, and puts its mouth down to the cloth.
If the patient's side is injured, and orders the minister to cut on the opposite side, and extends the scalpel to one of the two second ribs closest to the kidneys.
Then take the spatula, and cut the skin between the long ribs until you reach the point of the nipple, and make sure your fingers are completely on the skin of the rib, and gently scrape it with the blade of the knife until you see blood;
Then pierce the skin of the neck at the large abscess, and remove all the pus, and then put your fingers in, and expand the hole;
and do not touch the knee of the patient, but only the suture. copy everything or by pieces immediately the costeit of him subtle, that if you do not know how to copy it well, then the pain will return to him.
and if the knee jumps further during your work, then reset it in the joint as soon as you have completed the stitching with the suture.
then assemble the two sides of the knee with a stitch, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the knee corrupted by another disease, then release the veins that are suspended, doubting the drainage of blood.
Then cope the coin on all the suspender, and draw out the umbilicus, and cure as we have said.
And when it is swollen, it is assembled into two parts, which are the branches; if you cope the other part as you have done the first dislocation, then take out the blood, and put ointment of olive oil in the wound.
if you cope the other part as you have done the first dislocation, then take out the blood, and put ointment of olive oil in the wound. and put another soft linen in vinegar and oil, and put on the two coins, and tie double cloths, and lay it on all the part according to this form:
Then take the cloths, and use the laced linen according to this appearance and they should be assembled by sewing in the gusset of the pants, and one of the heads prays on the back, and the other on the part that is pointed.
And the other two heads of the second incision, and it should be all assembled in the loop of the bow.
And never has medicine been this difficult for this ram's cauterization in the size of iron, and that you prescribe the subtle cultivator of cauterization, and shave the hide of the calves, and it should be washed as we have said, if that the white sweat that contains the ague is discovered.
If you take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce that white sweat with the claws, and burn at this subtle cauterization.
And you will succeed in all ways that you can think of, as long as you try everything.
And make sure the fire does not touch the uterus.
And be assured that this work is more beneficial. And be careful not to lose blood, and be cautious with the size of the opening.
And if nothing contradicts you, or abscesses form or blood loss occurs, or something else, treat what is causing the contradiction according to what has been said.
And if the patient is unresponsive, and does not wait for this operation due to its horror, if it causes perforation, as I have said, and you are sure that after understanding the meanings we have mentioned, that this is the case, then fix the patient on his side with his legs raised; Because the throat pierces the wide part of all the surrounding flesh, and makes a long incision in the chest.
and if the wound is large, then all the inflammation will follow.
Then put a piece of cloth on the head, tie it, and leave the swelling of the inflammation until the wound is healed.
And if the wound is bleeding, do not allow the inflammation to exit the wound in the mouth of the wound, so that you can tie a thread or instrument with which to treat the inflammation of the hydropaths, or form it as it is before.
And enlarge the wound, and cleanse it, and gather that the inflammation returns, and it will be assembled after six months or more, and when it is assembled, as before, and then the patient will pass his time with the malady.
I advise that in the cutting of this branch, it is not done in more than one direction, for I think it is better to leave it.
And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say that every abscess comes either by cutting or by piercing, and I also agree. And it is for the most part true.
This is to know by excessive acidity and ague, which is expanded as coins, or by percussion.
and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the corpse. and does not have any pain, and the abscess is grievous.
and by chance there are some grievous abscesses that are pale and purplish in color, and of no vein or artery ever comes out.
When it is by vein, if it is caused by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers. 1. And it is necessary that you only touch it.
1. This is made of vein grafts and is recognized by its arrangement at the expression of touching both, and can well make the shape as this appears, and as the others. 1. And it is that you cut the curd, then the cheese is at the top, and the whey is white and clear, and release the suspended parts from all parts of the cheese.
1. If the cheese is already curdled with these grafts, then it is necessary that you stir the cheese and the curd.
If it is caught in the fist, or if it is in the vein that is closed, then you must deliver all of that blood, and the copa (cup) will overflow.
If the birth of the child is from below, and you must pull it all out, and cut the cord, as we have said.
If your labor is completed, then use the smooth linen thread in oil rose and wine, then continue with other treatments until it is healthy.
These are some bandages wrapped around an object resembling a bone, with the softening of the joints, and the patient suffers greatly as they move.
And the treatment for this disease is done well and promptly, just as we have seen in other cases, and all of you will know the outcome of it, according to what they used to do in the past.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on the high chair, then lift the suspender of the bones to your two hands, to all the flesh that is near the edge, and mark the masters, and extend them.
Then use the large-trenched spatula to cut through the area of the veins, as they are discovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then use a needle or have a double thread, and tie it to the first point where the wound came, and tie the other end to the other end. Then cut them straight, according to the length of the corse, and cut off the decayed moisture.
Then treat the wound as we do with others, or if necessary, open the vein, so that no vein pierces the other.
For there is no harm in it, and all the veins come out, if you can manage to draw blood from all of them. If he does not lose his strength due to the incision of the veins, and they become dry and cannot be helped.
The evacuation of this tumor is by section or laceration, or extension along the abdomen in the part of the intestines that descend from that rupture to one of the veins.
And this rupture is either due to laceration or extension, and these two methods of causing the problem are:
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And the signs of extension are when it is swelling and pain, if it happens suddenly and often in long periods, and does not suddenly cease. And the abscess grows until it reaches the foreskin, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
The symptoms appear when it is the small intestine that comes out, which brings sudden pain, and various apparitions of scars, except for the skin covering it, and this is due to the end of the intestine and the stomach causing inflammation of the small intestine.
And never has the intestine been released with the circle, and it is held back, causing great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron for pain, it is necessary to escape.
And the manner of the work is that if you command or massage the patient to move the intestine with their hand in the wound, if they can enter. Then, place your hand on their neck, and gently pull their chin.
Then, place the knee at the belly button, and cut all the hair from the long side. Then, cut the tendons of the long muscles according to what you can handle to open the wound, and make them as long as possible.
Then, scarify the skin that is dry and rough, as much as possible until it becomes white and hard.
Then, cut your index finger along the edge of the bone that is exposed between the white skin that is dry and rough, and the second skin, and stop when it is behind the knee.
And then move the left hand to remove the knot, and hold the white thread at your right hand's tip, and gently pull it towards the tail. And order the assistant to extend the thread at the top, and remove anything that is behind the limb.
And ask if your two have any intestines wrapped around or white thread hard, and if you find nothing, then open the belly.
Then take a needle or if there is a thick thread made of 10 threads, and open it in the back part that is after the leather of the knots. After the cut, then cut the hairs that appear to be threads, as long as there are four threads. Then assemble them one after another in a cross shape, and tie the string, which we mentioned is not of the skin of the bones, with a strong thread of two parts. Then wrap the threads of the threads, and tie them with two parts, so that no one of the scissors that are shaving can enter into you, as the gown does not fit. And then tie the string according to the first long thread, and after these two threads leave the string that is not of the skin of the bones, as much as one. and then all the other according to the rounds that the hand carries.
then proceed with the part that is not well-shaved around the fingers, both those who do not shave and those who have a beard, as we have said before.
then smear the smooth wool with oil, and make incisions, and I smear the one that we have said. And no time is the white suet cauterized that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding. For this is often repeated, and leave the line as it is for him.
and if it delays in the healing, then raise the heat with hot water, and make incisions as we have said, until it is sore.
Then, treat the wound with another treatment, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
of hernia carcinoma
In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
And the ancients said it was made like the tendons that are assembled like the veins, in a similar way that you tie the arteries, after cutting them lightly at the end of the bone;
Then, cover it with something, and treat the abscess that is causing it, as long as the arteries do not hurt;
and the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
No time comes rupture in angry wounds, as we have said, and open them;
and none of the intestines come out, and if they do, it's a matter of time, and repair them several times.
and if he stays too long in this position, if it is believed that the wound or syphilis has occurred, until the intestines come out.
and this happens due to the extension of the scar which is in the groove, as we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes soft and narrows the lips and opens.
and the cure if it is by cauterization, as we have said before.
and no time has ever been cured in this way. And it happens that the patient groans when he feels the pain on his back between your hands, then pulls the limb from the fracture, which swells large according to the quantity of three does.
Then remove the ointment that is dry on the skin, then take your hand and put it on the limb that seems to have a lot of sweat.
Then press your hand on the abdomen, then count the two limbs that seem to have a lot of sweat on the hand, and count both.
Then remove the hand from the abdomen, and do not pull or extend the urethra or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the wounds of the intestines. Then the treatment by the treatment of wounds.
Then the treatment by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if the wound is cleaned and healed, as soon as it is healthy.
The scar is concealed, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is harsh in this place, and further away from the wound.
of the softening of the leather of the thighs.
Many times the hair of the brows is cut in any man, because the horns that are born are softened, and it can be seen.
And it is necessary, when one sees the patient being treated, to shave the back of the head, and the barber cuts off the softened hair that is on the natural hair.
Then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened hair is at three stitches or four firmly.
Then cut between the stitches, and the barber as with other wounds, as long as it is healthy, and cuts the thread.
1. "dou chastrement" translates
1. Sicknesses that are caused by cold are mentioned in our law, and this is why I preferred not to discuss them in this book.
2. It is necessary for two reasons:
3. One reason is that the patient's response to the question and treatment can be determined through observation;
4. The other reason is that we often perform castration of certain animals for our help, such as sheep and lambs, and goats, and others.
5. Therefore, I say that sicknesses are treated in these two ways: 6. Either by attraction or by burning.
In the one that we make by attraction, let our seat be the best in hot water, as long as the coin is softened and during. Then put your finger in it, as long as they are back and you no longer feel them.
Of size reduction: It is necessary that you tighten the best seat, and press the curved part of the coin with your left hand, then pull the suspender, and cut each knot at the end of the coin when you have well burned them.
and leave no small sore or subtle sore that is on the veins.
This method of restraint is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because attraction does not tire from any adventure, as the beast desires pleasure.
Then treat the wound while it is still healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de feu
Hermann's method can be divided into two categories for humans: One is when the two openings are separated and look like the nature of a woman, or it has hair, and never once does it pass urine.
and the other way is in women, and it has to touch the hairs as a girl and the openings.
And the treatment of the stomach and intestines is when you cut all the knots and treat them as other wounds.
In the second manner, men whose urine leaps from the skin of their thighs, if there is no treatment.
Tentaginous is a char that is placed on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see. and no women have had such as this, and it is the cure.
It is necessary that you wash the superfluity of the tentaginous with your hand or nails, and lightly.
and do not make it too strong, for the blood that comes is not life, and then the other cure until it is healed.
and to another form that is not in the mouth of the patient, and the emplace, and by chance it jumps further, and it resembles the appearance of a cough, and for this it was called the ancient "cough disease". If it is necessary to cut, as we have said for temptation, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
Erratic if it is that the nature of the woman is not well known, or the cough is small. And it is by nature or accident due to a disease that has come, whether from birth or later.
And it is by nature or accident due to a disease that has come, whether from birth or later. Or it is by chance or due to a subtle or secret facial injury, and it is made in the mouth or on the chest, or in the neck, or wherever.
And then comes the design, and the pregnancy, and by chance the flow has;
and the knowledge of whether it is by the turn of the wheel;
If the dislocation is noticed immediately, whether it is your fault or theirs.
If it is subtle pain and it is approaching the ears, then go quickly and they will return.
You must assemble two indices, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs.
Then, the two ears are formed as long as the subtle pain does not return and is not overcome by dizziness.
Then, take the linen, and the oil, and put it on the shoulder, and make the woman sit each hour to prevent it from sticking.
And if the pain is severe and persistent, it may be necessary to use a mustard plaster resembling a flax seed.
If dizziness is of short duration, then let's go to the gallbladder and the spleen.
and have the medicines that cleanse blood, as well as blood of dragon, incense, and an abundance of urine.
then make a wide cut, if the wound cannot be stitched up;
and it should be long, and a tent of dry linen is made;
then treat other wounds as needed until it is healed.
2. And when the marriage comes, if it is necessary to cut, according to this method, do not enchant with apostles. 3. For the enchantment in the marriage that is in the patient, it should not be touched by force.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de Morning sickness is the first signs of pregnancy that are not usual, and when morning sickness becomes very strong, it becomes the lullaby.
And we have said in the division the appearances of the parts, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive care.
I say that the morbid and the swelling, when they are present in the marriage, and it is not apparent by feeling, if not by the care of iron.
Those who are in the mouth of the marriage, can be felt, are those that can be cured.
It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then open the tail with nails, and cut off the roots, then powder the medicines restricting blood, as for ice and blood of the dragon and incense, and similar things.
Then boil her feet at the door for an hour, then put them in cold water.
And if the blood comes out, then put it in a decoction of sumac and ash of green apples and pomegranate seeds and similar things, and then take flour of oats, and make with honey and sugar, and apply it to his back.
If it dislocates, it is bad. If not, I make him blow air on the back and see if it causes pain.
Then take a leaf, and the juice of plucked plantain or of rue with vinegar, and blow on the wound.
And when the abscess is healed, if you can cleanse the wound as soon as it is healthy.
And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the spicy herb called "thelul"; if it works, then cover it as I have said. And then cleanse it as soon as it is healthy.
There are many types of abscesses that come in the patient, such as chancre and puerperal abscess, herpes, gangrene, fistules, and empyemas, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
The correct translation of the sentence is: "Therefore, it is necessary to address this issue in this treatment, which is not an aposteme but a bow.
The correct translation of the sentence is: "And if you see that the fire is red, then look to see if the aposteme has started at its beginning, and with chill and fever, and if it becomes red, you will see it. The correct translation of the sentence is: "However, do not forcefully remove it, but make sure that the pain is calmed.
The correct translation of the sentence is: "Then I will place the patient on the bed, and have two pillows under their head, and one under their buttocks, and support their back and assemble their legs as if they were lying down.
And let his belt be expanded, and put on his shoes and laces, and tie them well with a bow.
Then the bile flows towards the left side of the chest, and the instrument used to open the mouth of the marriage is applied, and afterwards comes the form.
And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being applied, you fix the rait first to know the beauty of the bride, so that what comes out of the instrument does not exceed what it should, and does not hurt the midwife. And if the rait is larger than necessary, it is necessary to cover the beauty of the bride with cloths, so that what comes out of the instrument does not hurt.
And it is necessary that he puts the instrument's horn at the hole, and he draws the instrument.
And when the abscess is open, and it is made with the hand large, if it comes to the head, to the spumous matter.
And when the wound is visible, if it comes that you put in the wound soft tentacles in olive oil, or in green oil.
And put the tent of the wound at the corner of the marriage, and put under it the marriage and under the clean soft in vinegar or water that are cooked.
Then the care after two days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is healthy.
and never lift the wound and the cut with a feather and honey, and then with honey or roots of liquorice and aromatic plants that are long; and then apply the ointment.
And if the wound is dressed in the marsh, then it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
of childbirth Experience is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman pressing against the wall, and desires to smell the aromatic herb.
and then help the children of the fire. you understand that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from the head of the woman, and the second one with her.
When you see these signs, it comes to pressing lightly on his belly if the child is cold.
For when he descends from his head, if it is followed by him, and the marriage of his superfluities with good cleanliness.
And that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it never comes on its own feet, and comes to the heart or head, or hands, or when it comes to the belly or side, and is converted by chance of his collar, and by other harmful figures.
If it is skilled in the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures so that you can help him.
When the child comes to his head naturally, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her virtues are weak, if it is laid on a pillow or the women hold it.
and its nature is olive oil or fenugreek, and then cook the ointment between its two small spheres, which is its form: and divide the second part, and cut it to the length of the joint that has been corrected;
and make the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to wrap the woman with muslin of fenugreek with olive oil;
1. Then I will apply and apply the ointment, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour. 2. If it is now necessary to remove it.
3. And if the hands come out faster and faster, then you must gently pull them apart a little at a time. 4. And if they do not enter, then the woman should sit down on the chair, and gently lift her feet to the top. 5. Then lean the chair against the wall, and tie the woman's hair so that she does not fall while standing.
6. And if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then she should hold her hands at the corner that is in front of her, and pull out the child, and gently pull it apart.
From the issue of the child with its feet When the children come to their toes, if they want to put it on high. and then the turn is made little by little, as it is equal.
then she presses her toes and extends it little by little.
Can he jump as high as curved, if ordered to stretch, and I make it extend by condyle. If he jumps, may God see.
And if it does not jump as we have said, if the nail is turned a little by little until it is in accordance with the natural figure. For then it is light.
And if he does not jump as we have, say that I use muslin cloth, and ointment of sinews, and melted gum, and all in the mortar. and make of the woman's breast the poultice, then place it on the wound until it is dry up to the ribs.
and when it is soggy enough, take a piece of barley, and place it on top, and leave it for an hour. then place it on the fire, then stretch and pull the mouth and nose, and press the stomach lightly, as the child is now jumping.
of the issue of the child from its groin When the child comes in this form, if you hold its hands very little by little. then wrap it around its neck, and let it hang down, and then gently rock it. And she folds her hands together a little, and then she puts her hands on her belly, and she presses the knuckles of the fingers, until it is flat enough. And if the child does not jump, then take your hands and make them form a fist, then push the belly forward, then pull your hands back. And the child is small and small. And command the woman to push as much as the child will allow.
from the issue of the child who comes with a wide open hand It is necessary to bring the hand back. If we cannot bring it back, then lift the woman up and go.
If it cannot move, if I order it to stand on its feet, and the legs form;
then I will paralyze the muscles that I have mentioned.
and if it does not cry out, if I make it sit on my throne, then it will study the handcoming of the hand. and the child follows the natural figure, and I make it smaller, and I command it to pray as much as the child can.
from the child's neck, and spread its hands, and turned its face towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the dance marks its hand, then it turns a little and a little, and it becomes light.
When it is even, if I put on the muscles of the elderly and the oily, as we have said, then I command it to move a little and a little.
When you have done this, if it is placed on the inside of the shoulder, and it is commanded to be wet, then it will be stretched. 2. In the same manner for all subsequent times.
2. In the same manner for all subsequent times. When this happens to the entire second part of the shoulder, if the second part of the finger is not dry,
and if it can be held on its face and neck, if the cold does not hold, and the finger dies.
Then bind the child's hand, as long as you have put it in this way, and command the woman to never be wet.
Of the issue of the twins The children of twins are born many times, but never three or four times. This is a strange thing, and not often seen. Two things are strange, and do not live long, and are rarely known.
Two things are strange, and do not live long, and are rarely known. I know that they may be multiplied, and are destroyed by the lust that decorates them, which is subject to the body.
And never are they naturally like all others under, as we have said.
And if they come truly, then the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and it is made quickly and lightly what it does. And make it as it ought to be for greeting. Of more children
Never are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the old glorious wife, and cover that the dance is all there, because by chance something like this comes; if it is made according to this that it ought to be;
Of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead or dying child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to open with your hands; If it is necessary that you cut off the woman's head if she is of sound virtue and has no accident or dies.
If it is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
and the midwife applies the burn of II part, or she is laying down if she is not treated at the descent of the child.
Then anoint the mouth of the midwife with moistened oils of olive, musk, and fenugreek, and the linseed, then wipe her hands with these oils and muscillages.
Then the bones are lightly cut, then the head or the shoulders that can be bent at this point, and one takes care that the children are not exposed to falling down from the head;
if the bones are found in the neck or collarbone or mouth or ears or beard or chin or cheekbones, and if the member is cut off, then it is cauterized or burned and the wounds are cleaned;
and it is necessary to burn the bone in the left hand, and places the cork between the two fingers of the right hand, and cuts the bone with all the left hand, and does not miss any of these joints that we have mentioned, as long as it reaches the empty state;
Then look for another onyx, or if you are skilled in this, if the extractions are equal.
And then the extractions are equal by moving from one side to the other, by pulling, and if the onyx teeth are held by pulling, as in this form:
And if a part is loosened, if one of its two oils does not remain, and the other is taken out in that part, and the other part is handled.
And if it is not loosened at all, then place this onyx or higher on the limb, and do this until it is completely free.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the strain, then you must wrap it around as tightly as possible, until it is entirely wrapped. Then the bandage is tied around the ankle joint or wrist, and it is then necessary to tie it with the other hand and pull on the feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to deliver, or there is a sudden increase in pain, then you must cut the sharp spatula between your two hands, and then remove the spatula and take out the pus. or you cut it with the instrument called "almidach", or if the formation comes with the menstrual blood or after the chapter.
and in this same way, children are naturally born.
and then pull on the bones with nails, and if it does not fall away, it is held in place by force, as long as the moisture that caused it is or was present;
and if it cannot be removed, then cut it apart at the place where you put it;
and if it is twisted in the belly or loosened from the ribs, then you must cut through it as long as the moisture is present;
And if the child is near its bones, if it is gently attracted, and the stitches are placed in the mouth of the mother it is light.
And if it is twisted in the belly or at the anus, then you must pull it out gently with your hand; and they make the belly or the buttocks, as long as the moisture remains on it.
and if the other bone is affected and the shoulder is dislocated, then he should hold his hand in front of him and pull it back towards the breast, and he will be able to pull it out of the mouth of the breast. Then he should pull out I one bone or II another, and he will be able to pull it out.
and if the mouth of the breast is retracted due to inflammation that has come, then there will be no need for manipulation, but it is necessary to administer moist and heavy things. and the administration is applied, and it is cooled and moistened in an ointment.
If the child is lying on its side, and you place it straight, then follow what we have said in the live child;
and if there is no pain, if it is broken in pieces, and nothing of the second part remains.
And when you have done this, follow what we have said about the abscess that comes in the marriage.
And if the evacuation of blood comes, if it is put in ice to restrict, and other cures are followed.
And I see a woman in whose belly some children were dead, then consulted me with another and said death to the others. After long time, there came some abscesses in the body, and they swelled as soon as they were seen, and began to cause great pain.
I was called for the cure, and I thought it would be long, and I could not relieve the pain.
I applied strong pressure with a hard attraction, and after some time, more and more. I was surprised, because the belly had no bones.
If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
I wish for the wound, and in treating hands with ice, as long as the woman was not better. and the woman long tensely, and it was a little below the knee.
and I did not remember this chapter for only because, when the master made an unusual thing, he thought to ask for help.
Then comes the form of the compress, with which we wrap the books.
and then it turns around as the heads of the two legs. Indeed, the horns are more slender and narrow, and should be made of flat or round.
and the mouth should be of the size of a thumb, and the margin of the trees should be of a length of a palm and a half. and among the two limbs are two dislocations of this same joint, which are closed on one side and open on the other, half a palm in length or a little more.
and these two dislocations are bitten in the mouth of the patient to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, which is more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat or beaded material, depending on the appearance of the tines. and it has the two dislocations, as you see, half a palm in length, and it must be wide.
When you see the female open the marriage all the instruments, if the woman is I lit, the thighs and the legs are spread, then pull the two dislocations together in the marriage, and hold the end of the instrument's handle between your fingers. Then move your hand along the entire instrument, if you have inserted it correctly, according to the quantity you see opened in the marriage's mouth, as long as the ball fits as she sees.
This instrument is all around, and its appearances are multiplied. When you see it appeared, the more he moves, the higher it goes for its quantity.
2. If you do not despise the instrument that you have not yet seen, because its necessity is not your own.
When the second pillar is held in childbirth, if it comes that you command the midwife to hold her hair, and then stretch it with tweezers, and then force your hands to her mouth and nose. And if she jumps for this, it's well.
If not, then I can, and make a puncture or incision, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the mother, such as mint, cloves, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury. All these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or boiled in hot water.
Then place a cork or a plug in the end of it, and the other end in the mare's mouth, and tighten it as much as the vapor comes out of the mare.
Then I make it tighter, as we have said. If the second dose is not given.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not better, then command the patient to massage their left hand with oil of sesamum or musk, and then blow in the nose, and they want the second one. And when she finds it, if she grabs and stretches it a little at a time, so that the mare does not resist the extraction.
But the purpose is to move lightly to the right and left, and then trace. If it comes and dries out.
And if the mouth of the wound is closed, we have said the cure to dilate and fumigate with herbs.
And if it does not contain all that we have said, then keep from touching the tracing.
But what is inside the mouth of the wound, you should tie it to the woman's nail, then apply ointment with four-drug mixture. If it is washed and reset, and it comes out further.
But all that, if it comes out with a bad smell in the stomach and head, and harms the patient. If then there are necessary purifying smoke:
no one of the ancients has tried purifying smoke of basil and dry figs.
The form of the instrument is that which is used to burn the woman with the retention of flowers and the second seed if this is:
And it seems like a dog, and it puts the large head under the nature, and the wide heads under the fire.
and the smoke over the charcoal, and the sweat as much as it is possible, and another one begins again.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it has been smoked some subtle powder. If it comes down to the dance where they pierce that man's ear, and do not pierce it with a sharp nail, and make sure the prick does not touch;
then place the wound with fine cloth in wine and oil, then apply the ointment as soon as it is clean.
If you doubt that it will not heal, if you put on a poultice of plaster, and leave the hands free, and see what happens when the children go to bed in their rooms.
And never comes a swelling from wounding or abscess. If it comes down to the swelling: If you treat it, as we have said about the snake's venom.
Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow when they come out of the root, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one or more;
When the node is old, if it is worked on, and moisture is applied with warmth or subtle force, and they are never seen to be persistent fistulas.
They are known by the fact that they are caused by either ejection or ventrism when the patient evacuates, and by chance, some jump.
And if fistulas are present in the uterus and half of the vagina. and reach the joint of the clitoris and the root of the penis.
And it is known that the persistent fistula is at its base, and not persistent. When you cut your finger, if it bleeds a lot, and you insert a small needle made of iron or steel into the wound when it is not twisted.
And if it is twisted, and you insert a small needle or horsehair thread, as soon as you feel the needle or hair thread in your finger.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no sign of bleeding, pain, or swelling, as we have said. If it does not pierce easily. If you feel pain to cure.
When the fistula is present in the bladder or leads to urine, and if the urine suddenly comes out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
And if it pierces easily at the joint of the finger, if the needle or hair thread goes into the finger. If he does not have cunning and the invention of pain, then it is that he will be in great pain and needs immediate medical attention.
And in these Persian-like fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of proud people who enter them.
In the one that is not Persian and not ancient, with hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient groans between your hands on his back.
and he gently lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his abdomen. Then make a tent of rain, or of planks if it is twisted, as long as you can or the tent comes.
If the patient feels it through the bone, then you must cut your finger, and it is clear that the tent has been set.
And it is discovered or you feel between your thumb the joint or the knee, therefore check that it is straight. If it cannot be made straight with a little effort.
It is said that one can make any joint straight, but this takes time.
And it helps if you wash the cauterization with the fistula according to its size, as it is said in front. and the butt is all hot as it is made in the fistula, as long as it remains in the foundation. and cut this twice or three times, as long as you think that these marks must be made, which resemble a feather of ostrich.
and then the treatment of the wounds is softened with bread, as long as that mark remains, then the treatment of the ointment is applied and dried.
If he is in good health, so be it.
If so, no other name can be healthy.
And if it is tried between, and does not pierce the one that is at the foundation, and between your thumb and finger an espece of cloth or soap is placed, and you see the fistula at which the cloth is shown; If the glove covers the beginning of the fissure, and it comes out before the tent, and then the cauterization is performed afterwards, as long as it reaches the head of the tent. and will be delivered to the tent, and will hurt.
Then, deflect those charms that seem like a feather of a sparrow, and none remain unbroken.
If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire or medicinal heat.
For the fire cautery, there are two main things assembled: it is to know, the surety of these charms that are displaced, and the closure of blood and the removal of moisture.
then the treatment of tented wounds can be made by boiling or smoking, as long as it is not boiled and the charms are placed in the fire.
Then, treat the wound of the burnt suet with hot, dry medicine.
For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return often.
And if a fistula comes suddenly with great force, and it is removed from the body, if the flesh is torn or broken, and investigate this matter.
If you feel the tent, and it is made of cloth or silk, or if it is near to tearing, if it has not been injured by a sharp object, then by the application of one of the three methods below:
or you burn it as we have said, or you cover it with a poultice and treat it as before.
and do not burn too much at once, but cover the foundation with a poultice and let the exudations pass through the desired opening. Then the treatment, as we have said.
Then the treatment, as we have said. By chance, if it is healthy, you remove the covering and the skin, then it is covered with something from the foundation, or by force or with another instrument appointed. Then you deformed the wound that was in the wound, as much as you can. Then you study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part that is deformed from the foundation.
Then you study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part that is deformed from the foundation. If there is a lighter thing for the patient.
And never are fistulas in this way: and when you pull the string in the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation from the skin, if you take a string according to this form: And if you cut it in two, and pull the tent through all the fistula as much as it is at the head:
If it is present at the margin of the foundation, then pull out the thread of that which has been pricked, as you reach the end of the foundation.
and cut off the end of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and pull them apart, and leave one or two.
and do not fasten it once, until the threads that are between them have been tightened as much as possible, and knotted.
Then treat the wound as soon as it is sore and clean.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not fit. For it is not necessary to make the stitch too tight if it fits, and then the cure, as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
The form of the spiny thorn which was used to make the fistula if it is hard and of a single tooth, part and tears it apart. And on the other hand, because it is not possible to cop (or handle) this because of what you see here:
Errorms are according to two ways: They are either denser than the foundation, like resin grains, and they become smaller and larger, and when cut, they cause pain and injury, and they damage the foundation and its root;
However, those that are denser have little moisture, and when cut, they have a little bit of golden-colored or bluish-green, and they have the color of corns;
And the treatment for those that are denser is that you command the patient to let it run freely in chambers as much as the foundations will allow, and they will see the hairs; If you have sharp nails, or if you hold it by its root, then pull it out in its entirety.
If the uncinate bone cannot be held by its roots, then bend it at the neck, or at the shoulder, or from a piece of cambric. Then pull it out through your two hands, and clean it with some warm powders that are in the fire cautery. Or if you cauterize as instructed in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healthy.
And if they become united, then cauterize the patient with clister, which is bitter and sharp, and wash the part where they are united, so that it may open. The patient must follow the instructions, and if the wound is shallow, a light cure is sufficient.
The patient must follow the instructions, and if the wound is shallow, a light cure is sufficient. And if you prick your finger or nails with the needles, clean them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy and do not fear the incision by fire. If it happens that you loosen the stitching according to this method:
If it happens that you loosen the stitching according to this method: Take the thread tightly, and pull it through the eye, then lay the thread down at the other end, make sure the other end is sharp, turn the two ends of the thread over the sharp end, and if it is large;
And he tightens the thread, then knots it, and pulls out the needle, and does the same for all the others, and leaves him to correct any excess blood.
Then he puts the foundation lax and smooth in oil or wax, and puts it on the foundation, and commands the patient to rest.
And then he leaves it until the wounds are fully healed, and when they are, if there is any other treatment or care needed, until the patient is healthy.
It seems like there might be a mistake in the provided text. The phrase "dou sechement dou fiens ou fon Many times there has been scarring in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine is powerless. If you must return to the point of a spatula or your nail, which does not allow it to dry. Then the doctor, as he can, according to what is necessary.
And if he cannot reduce it, then the dislocation returns more forcefully than before, until it is painful and burned. Then the doctor, as he can.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou Insect bite is a small swelling that should appear near the heart and causes pain.
And never the fever leaves it, and it feels like death, and comes throughout the body, and more hands than other parts.
And the doctor if you take a fox's tail or a vulture's feather, and place it on the fever, as long as the purple circle encircles the fever completely. Then turn your hand around all the chain as you coil it from end to end, and insert it in its place, and adjust the movement of its roots.
If you see, if I make this of a copper or iron needle according to this form, and it is very fine and thin: Do not forget to measure, but hold tightly, and press firmly.
And if you see, if the cautery burns the joint, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
Never once have I seen a silver or gold clasp, or an alloy or hinged one.
and never once have I seen these small and large chews, according to which they are stolen. But these are made in the treatment of children and weak and painful ones, they are small:
But these are made in the treatment of children and weak and painful ones, they are small: The form of the little and big fire cautery is such that it is inserted wide, or the belly is made in this manner:
and if there is a distention or the belly is tight, as you see, and the child is not perceived;
and in one of the costes of the second pustule, and in the other.
and if it is the belly or if they put medicines from a vessel of beef or of paraffin, and perceive all around every pustule, and each pustule should have a spice, then pour in these pustules I fil strong I thread crooked X or entor, and assemble the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is given, if the line has the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clasp.
and it is the form of a circle:
And if the medicine is not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or tallow of beef or something similar, then pour it in lightly. Then the surgeon uses his two hands to assemble the instruments, as much as possible, then removes the clasp, and gently supports the patient's legs on the table, and if necessary, applies the medicine as it comes out, until the wound is as large as it can be. And if he sleeps all night, it will be even better.
2. And if you have a dislocation of the abdomen due to disease, and the medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
And if the patient has an abscess or gangrene, if the clasp is also very small, as with a child.
And it is the form of the subtle clasp that is drawn on, if the skin is also very tight.
We have said in the division of the cure of wounds.
The translation of "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent." is:
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the place or the wound is made, and how it is made.
The things that are made are by piercing, and the size of the eye and the tooth, or the lance, the dart, or the spear, or similar things;
according to the bones of the shoulder, like a wound at the neck, or on the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the chest, as the remembrance comes to this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes on the chest, and the bone is not broken, if it is by piercing or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt of gangrene: If the head wound is not healing, and blood comes from the wound, and it is worse on one side than the other.
and the patient suffers from excessive alcohol consumption and large amounts of meat.
And if it does not heal, and the patient's meat becomes lean, and they do not drink alcohol, and do not eat charred meat.
and apply the wound with a poultice of herbs and oil, or wine, if it comes out easily.
And if the poultice does not stick to the wound, and it is fresh at all its edges, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will mention later.
If it is moved, if it is placed on any wounds, as long as it is clean.
When the wound is large, like that of a spear and similar things, and the lips cannot be assembled by tenting, if they can be assembled by stitching, if I may say so, like belly wounds, by sewing.
If the wound is discovered to be on bone, and can be held, but only with one hand, then it is called a "cope. Then the wound is treated with medicine and restored with leather, and orders the patient to eat large meats, such as tests, flour, and chicken, as well as similar things.
And if you drink or eat raw meat, and it does not touch the bone, then the wound is called a "cope" for the entire time it lasts, and it heals.
If an artery has entered the wound or vein, which cannot be cut without causing damage, and it cannot be relieved by medicine, if the artery needs to be cut, and you can dislodge it by tying a string. And if this does not help, if the cautery is applied.
And if these wounds are small and simple, if it is treated lightly. And if you put this powder on the wound, which does not seem to have caused any pain.
The way the powder is applied is. Take some candlewax on a part. The first sentence to translate is "sanc de dragon II parties". The translation of this phrase is "dragon's tooth, two parts". The second sentence to translate is "chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment". The translation of this phrase is "the live chalz has three parts, and the subtle powder, and use the wound, and they form together, as it heals well and joins with all its sanc".
The third sentence to translate is "et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle". The translation of this phrase is "and then it heals well, and let it feel slippery, if it does not". The fourth sentence to translate is "car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee". The translation of this phrase is "because we do not stop the medicine until it is cured".
And no time is it made, but when there is no incense or sanctuary from the dragon, but only the art has moved the wound.
And if he thinks the wound is not healing, immediately in this manner, do not use any other powder.
but use some digestive ointments, or wheat flour dough made of vinegar and honey, as soon as it starts to seep. Then continue with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then use fine tweezers to remove it.
And I will tell you later about the more serious fractures.
Of the wound of the shoulder
A wound comes from the shoulder
If it is a dislocation, then if there is no other option but to leave the treatment alone and do not use anything restricting, because it helps to reduce and pull back the bones. and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of such is with the brain, which is the heavier member.
but if the medicine is warm, such as when chalz is washed in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and the wound is also washed in gentle water, and other pierces according to this method, and moist ointments.
If the wound is large, and it is covered with bandages, then the treatment will continue as soon as it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and full of hair and bowels, then the arrow or lower down the limb.
And if the artery is cut, and the blood flows, then the patient should be desouvied, and the limb removed, and the cauterization is done as best as possible.
If the spine of the neck is broken at the base, either the jaw or the tongue, and the conduits are kept, by which the meat comes out, if the bone is below the chin of the neck, and does not touch the head but is returned to its natural figure; Then the patient is strapped and some hair is left, then the care of discharges is discarded as soon as it is healthy;
and if the wound has impressed the bone, if he wants. and if there are pieces of bone, if the cut is as deep as possible, and those that are not possible, leave it as much as the wound presses, and be careful and alleviate the result;
If the wound is fresh, then powder as I have said. And if he has in the wound bone and it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a lance or arrowhead wound, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound to see if the bone is protruding: And that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh at all its point, then do not put anything in the first hour, but powder only on the sore, and let it be soaked with the sore until it becomes soft, and open it up at the chest, and see the face of the patient; but it gives an attractive pull, and he pulls it twice the day.
and if you have no pull, then put cotton in the wound for suction to dry the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four or more days. if there is no spasm, and no trembling of the body, and no straining of the limbs. and when you see the good position, be glad that the wound is saved. Treat the dislocation with splints and other treatments as soon as possible while the patient is still healthy.
If it cannot be healed, and is made worse by her efforts, she should seek medical attention.
If the cure is done correctly. And if the wound is an incision or a cut with a scalpel, and it is simple, or on the back, if the care provided by the one in front of you is sufficient. If the wound is large, of great concern.
If the wound is small, of little concern, and it is in the bone, and has been infected with pieces, if the patient wants to know about the wound, and they should be treated if they are dry. If they are not dry, if the wound is left open, if it is extracted, if it is aligned.
When there are other wounds on other parts of the body, and they are judged to be similar to what we have said.
The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre." The translation of
The opening of the stomach is large and difficult and small.
but no time the intestine, or the intestines, by which the insertion of others.
and the wound is more painful, and no time the small wound that the large one, because we have to put more pins in the intestines, if we do not put them back in a row.
because the intestines swell so much that they feel pain, if they are put in more pins, and because it is harder to manage the other wound, because we have to pull the intestine back to its place.
1. And you should know that the dislocation of the ribcage occurs in four ways:
2. The most common costurings come from the costuring of the ribcage, and the costurings of other body parts are common in other injuries.
3. And all of them are more proper with the costuring of the ribcage, and I will say each one and declare it.
4. I say that when the wound is small, and there is no harm to the intestines, and it is difficult to set, this is one of the four ways: 5. Either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are compressed by the force.
When it is inflamed, wash it with a certain way: Dampen a sponge or a soft cloth only, or use hot water and salt and vinegar and rinse the intestines as long as they are not sore.
And never make this wine tightening, and it is dried that it can be opened.
When you see the intestines coming out, if the hot or cold water has not been cooked, because of this it is difficult for the entrance to be closed.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the incision with the instrument and cut the blood clots.
The first cure is to cut off the size that has no need to be cut unless there is great necessity.
This is the first cure by cutting:
If he cuts through the tendon in the shoulder and does not, then see the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if it is put back in according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, because this is good.
When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest: And if it is in the lower part of the belly, then he should lie down with his head and chest higher than the parts below, and thus he will not rupture the abdomen by putting more weight on one side than the other:
And then it comes to administer what I say in great and dirty wounds.
Small wounds, use what seems appropriate, then take between your hands the pitying ointment that stains all the rupture on your hand, and gather your lips.
And this is the common way of sutures, and that you use a needle or more, according to the size of the wound, then leave the end of the wound free, and sew it with a needle or one that has a strong thread. And perforate the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the sifac, which is the opposite of the leather's grain, as long as you can perforate it from that side, and gather the two ends of the sifac in groups of four.
Then the strain of a double thread through the needle of II parts, then assemble the II heads of the wound, and then leave ID spicules, and then insert another needle.
Then the thread of the needle is as you have done the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you are used to with needles, until all the wound is restricted.
And the needles should be sharp and thin, for thin needles close all the skin, and very thick ones do not enter well. For it is necessary that they be sharp.
and it is not necessary to pinch the eyes too hard on the nose and cheek, which do not close and wound the wound before the suture.
and then pinch the heads of the eyelids, which do not swell the patient at night, and put cloths or blankets on the eyelids to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
This method of stitching eyelids is more comfortable for small wounds, as it does not cause pain to one or the other.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you gather the two eyelids of leather and the two eyelids of silk together with one thread or it has a strong thread.
When you have perceived these four parts assembled, first reset the needle at the part where you began. In the same manner as the threads.
and place a splice between each stitch of the large part of a thread.
This stitch saves the man's life, and I saw a wound that some had in their bellies, which was caused by a cut, and it was a wound more than a palm of great size, and it was intestines well over two palms of great size, and it was the wound in his belly.
I returned to the intestine after it had been twenty-four hours, and it was then fifteen years old, and the patient was treated, and they became healthy again.
And he saw that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and do not cure it with ointments, because I am in the shoulder or nowhere to be found, and no remedies are available. and apply cotton wool soaked in warm vinegar twice a day on the wound, and rinse with honey-sweetened water as it heals.
Or, if you ask for the two most common methods of cooking:
take the needle, and remove the sharp part from the end of the thread.
when it has pierced the right through the right, if you have lost the tip or needle, or if you have removed the needle, and then perforate another part of the sharp part, until it is smooth.
And they understand this technique if you follow as the barber does the beard, and once you let go of one end, and then take it back again, until the hair is fully styled.
The second method of braiding, which Galiens himself calls, is if anyone can do it, which assembles the two parts naturally, and applies one end of the hair to the other end, in this way:
Thread a needle or hair hook near the end, and carefully measure it, and leave the other two ends of the hair. Then turn the needle, and measure it from the opposite end, using the other two ends of the hair.
Then I measure the distance between the two parts of the limb, in two other points that are on the opposite side.
And this is the most common way of stitching and the best.
Galen says this, and no one testifies to it, so we must sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each.
And it must be sewn with one needle from one side and the other from the other side, in the same way as those that are being stitched.
And he says that when the wound is in the belly, if the stitching is more painful than other stitches in the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds.
And it is that when you touch the fresh wound with all its blood, if it has not moved, then reposition the intestine, and it will heal.
Then put the dust powdered char on it, and if it has not moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed. And cut the string, and they will be less painful, and it will heal. Then treat the wound as you would with others, until it is healthy.
And if you do not have medicine, then put it on, as much as it comes out of the belly, cotton wool, and rub it twice a day until it is healthy again.
For you have no other skill in other positions than the wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound does not cause permanent damage to the principal limbs, then it is best to moisten lightly with oil of chalcyreus or rose oil, and put on the ankles, and remove the sutures.
And if it feels pain or fluid in the bowels, and often comes out, then the dressings should be changed to wine from Germany, and at the same time the fluid comes up to the intestines.
And the perc mark, and scars that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
The small intestine, which is called "young," cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the knots that tie it, and the subtlety of all the body's parts, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
And if the gut leaps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it becomes dark and turns towards the black, then you must lie the black one that has veins and arteries, because it has veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the lines, and move the two heads downwards from the edge of the wound until the extraction is loosened when the gut jumps, and the wound bows.
Of the bursting of the womb
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in a few days, because I have seen that some people were saved or had their bellies shot by a lance.
and the wound was on the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and contained the excretion and vomiting;
I treated him according to my ability and continued to sublimate until he was healthy, and I saw the results.
And when I saw him recover, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly. and he had no harm, but he improved with better conditions, and drank and ate.
And say no experiencers that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be treated in a certain way: He should stretch his jaws widely, then bring the corners of the wound together, and when he has stretched his mouth as far as it will go, if he puts his lips on either side of the wound, so that it pulls his mouth open;
Then he grips the wound and holds it tightly, if he can't slip, then he stretches his jaws in the same way as before, until the wound is completely surrounded by his teeth; And hold the wound.
The first line of the text translates to: "If they burn in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread very fine that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in a certain way:".
The second line of the text translates to: "Take the head of this intestinal thread that is full of feces, and then tie it to the head of this linen thread I, and thread the thread through the needle, and then cut the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;".
The third line of the text translates to: "And this way of stitching is not worse than according to the course of engagement and hope;".
When the wound is large and wide, and it is in one of the small intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, it should be treated with great care.
Of a fistula or if it is It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and at the same time if they are thin and straight.
And a fistula is formed according to the nodulation that must be hard and bluish, where one feels pain, and it is as fine as the tail of an ox.
And never in a clear jump, and sometimes it is thick. And never sharp, and sometimes it is quite.
And I have seen it in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed, and there is no cause, it is only due to one of the eight causes. It is to know, by the small pain of blood or corse; For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. If the medicine is not effective in the cure. For because corruption is a kind of pestilence. For by the property in the region, digestion is delayed, and health is delayed, and it flees by nature. Or he has veins or bones.
And I have shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
The following sentence to translate: "Or covenant that I make you know the cure of fistula which is made by hand's work.
Surge that fistula comes in all members of the corps. For he has fistulas that come from great veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the costals, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; If a part of the member comes to its own, and it is like this.
And all the fistulas of this kind are of good healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance.
And if there is no fistula that does not come to the part I said, and you are married to the cure, and you see it done, then take a needle or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you want.
And if the fistula is twisted, then search with a fine needle, because the needles do not go through the twists.
And if the fistula of hands is purulent and you do not press it well with your hand, if it is infected by one of the wounds, for the moisture is short in one wound and cleanses the other.
Then, if you are wise, you will know whether it is bone or flesh, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when their hand is pressed, and where they feel the pain.
And when you truly know the bone or flesh, and whether it is far from the joint, or the nerve, or the artery or vein, or any of the joints I have mentioned, if the copper according to what I have said, and the falsehood and the corrupt bones that are dense.
Then the cure, as long as she is healthy, and if the fistula is well lined with the right place, then it should be covered as soon as possible, as soon as you can, then put fine cloths in the medicated water, and the bougies are inserted into the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is left in the font.
then put clean bandages on the healthy part, as long as it is healthy.
if it is not healthy by this, then the cauterization is done as we have said, and if the part is corrupted by the fistula, then it should be cut off.
If the joint does not cause pain or the principal limbs do not suffer, as we have said.
And if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupted and black, until the corruption is completely removed, then the treatment of things that are strange and unusual will be done as soon as it is healthy.
And if it is not healthy, and the belly becomes thin, as before, you should know that you are not fit to do this.
If the dislocation is discovered and you want it as much as you can be at the joint, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb.
And if it is healthy, that is good. If not, you should know that corruption is too advanced, and it will not improve. if there is no other means than natural remedies.
if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can remove it with needles, if possible, and if there are more, do not leave any;
and if the moisture is against you, and there is no pain or fear, then cope with it and endure the heat, and deliver the bones;
And if you do not cut the bones in an hour, if you put something slippery on the wound, and leave it as long as it is moist between the bones, and then they will become lighter between the bones;
and if it is large bones, such as thigh or knee, if only the corrosion remains until blackness covers the entire area, then restore the wound.
and if it has large parts of corroded bone, and comes near the bone; if it is necessary to sew and cover all the corrosion, and then treat as much as possible;
and I will tell you about an abscess that came to one's leg, if you take it as an example and help in your practice.
It was the young man who had been in his thirties, who had a pain in his leg for a cause that came from the chest, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he was hidden by a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
But the patient was so mad that they overwrote everything, and it corrupted the materials, and became a fistula, and then pus came out of the wounds and the cold made the body shiver and the moisture increased.
And for two years, they were cured, and no one had any knowledge of the art of hands, as I was called, and I saw their leg and the medicines used to cure them, and what was corrupted by the pus at great cost. And the patient's cheeks became red, and had a citron color.
I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the other part of the leg.
I was surprised, and I found in one of the wounds a part of the bone, and I discovered it was corrupted and decayed, and the corruption reached the dens of the bones.
I was the one who appeared from the corrupted bone, and I took care that it had no other corruption, as long as I stayed.
and began to restore the wound with long stitches of sodanic medicines, and could not stitch.
and then I took it out again, and revealed the bone as far as possible, and found continued corruption in the bone, and treated it, and then put it back in, and made a decision to stitch the joint. but I could not do it until I cut off a piece of the bone, and it was all its size, then I restored it with medicines. And it was cured and relieved quickly, and he did not want to repeat the operation because of the inability of the surgeon, who could not endure it, and for fear of death that I had for him. For as the evacuation of blood is often, but it was completely healthy, and a hard char was found on the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or opposite effect in any way, nor in the air nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in no joint of the arm, then it should be set in this way: Take the levers, and draw the head of the bone up to the open end, and command that it does not extend further up. And take another lever of greater size than the first one, and lie it on the cheek that is on the bone, and pull the head, if you can draw the broken part of the bone away from the cheek, and release the cheek, so that the lever does not break the cheek.
And place the incision at a distance of one finger's breadth from the bone to cover the corrupted part.
And soak as much as possible and see and feel the corruption, and soak again.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the surrounding tissue or a part of it, then cut through the entire bone.
Then make another incision, and then soak the affected part with water from one end to the other, and let the water be as long as the corruption is deep. As we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and see if the bone or it contains another part.
And if corruption spreads to the continuation of the second joints, if there is no other cause than cold copper.
And if corruption is or a prick of the hand, or a prick of the foot, if it is very hard that thing, but it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, knowing how it opens. And you purify it in all ways that you can, but the vein or the nerve will not oppose you.
And you question the incision and the bones that these bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their growth and their smallness, and their hardness. and because it happens in each appearance of the work's instrument.
and you should know that the work will show the instrument you will use, according to the knowledge of this art, and it testifies to the ways of diseases. if the instrument you will use does not match according to what is needed.
The head of the shoulder presses due to weakness or by reason of drought.
And when you have treated the corrosion with medicine, and it does not improve, then it may be necessary to cut into the member up to the place where the corrosion comes, if the malady is greater than that of the death or the malice, which is more serious, of the fault of the member.
When the signs appear that the limb becomes black, if it seems that it is from burning heat, and then after the discoloration, this corrosion spreads to all the limbs, and takes hold of everything.
If you feel heat in the body, and it is due to the impact of some beasts' venoms, like a sea scorpion and wasp, and if corrosion occurs at the site of heat, then the cope, and it does not give any spice to come to the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, if the cope is at the joint, if the corrosion does not come to the arm.
If it comes to the elbow, if the cautery is at the cost.
If it passes the cost, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue.
And so entirely makes what the corrosion comes or pierce. If it comes in the first joint, if the cautery after another joint.
And if it comes or pierce, if the cautery all the virtue. And if it goes up in the leg, if the cautery at the joint of the great toe.
And if it comes from above the knee, if there is no other engine but to kill the patient.
And the manner of coping with or treating the member if it is that you bind it and loosen, and extend some measures on one of the lings above, and others on the other ling below, and you sew the thread that is between the two lings at the widest part of the bone as long as the bone is discovered.
Then the treatment or stitching, and use a different thread for each part, so that it does not touch the healthy skin, and go to the surgeon for another wound and gangrene.
And if the blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the skin at once, or if you put on any constricting powders.
Then return to your medicine as soon as it is accomplished, then tie the injured limb with a flexile cord, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
and I will tell you what happened to my home in a short time.
It appeared a black thing that seemed to be burning, and this corrosion came first in its youngest part, consuming the whole piece.
And when the wound was seen, if it could be closed, it became healthy.
And later when the wound was returned to the hand, it came to me, and I put on things with the effect of disinfecting after embalming the corrosive parts, and it could not stop the corrosions.
and I say that I will hold his hand, and I do not have hope of reflecting the matter. and it also doubts that if I cut his hand, he will not die because the strength of the hand was weak.
and he became desperate, and returned to his land, and managed to save his hand, and he was healthy.
and I have not heard of this before because we have other things to do, and we are used to it.
Never has an apoplexy come to the wild boar, and it takes as long as it takes for a great assembly of arrows. Then it cuts and pierces, and with a jump, it breaks the bow, and frightens the watchers, just as some hunters do. The skin that is covered is as delicate as silk, and does not cover the bone or the nerve, and such disease is so called "holy" but should be called "fissure";
But if it is so long that it reaches the bone, then it should be called "fissure";
And if the skin is such that it cuts through the entire skin, and at the same time, it is as delicate as silk, like some hunters do; and do not keep it for its corruption.
And if you are engaged and the hair does not become corrupted, and it is very thick, then the cure of clothing is easy:
look if the breasts are large, and the bow which is in it has a strong odor, therefore, the treatment with Egyptian medicine which is made here is: take ashes, oil, and turpentine, mixed, and cook in one vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey:
and then take according to your need, and make it in wine and honey, and cure the breast, and strain the pustule: and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pulling it out.
do this as many times as the breast is deformed and until the pain stops.
and never put ashes of smoke in the wound while this medicine is present, and if you use grapevine ash instead, and it causes pain, then remove it as soon as you feel that the breast is well-shaped.
and if the patient cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine does not cause pain, then remove the ashes of smoke with honey or if there is a little bit of burning, it should be done. If you choose to rinse the wound with honey and wine mixture, where honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and wine makes it aerated and healthy.
And when you have done this, and you ensure that the wound is well cleaned, if the rinse of this what is made in the, and it is that you preignes emplaustre diafinit, and they make with rose oil and wine.
Or if you rinse the wound with some medicines and ointments, which I have mentioned their properties or treated of ointments.
And if the wound is small, and the rinse of the wound does not enter, if it is enlarged by a pin, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is eslargiez.
When the wound is too large, if it does not bleed sufficiently, and the doctor allows it to only touch the skin or the clyster can enter, and if the pus that gushes out is green, then the doctor or lower down on the leg than it is.
and if you do not cover the wound with something like we have seen, if it appears in such a way that the wound correals to the lowest part of the leg where it is, since when the wound is fully formed, if it does not leave any space for the stitch, and if you do not cover the wound with something like we have seen, if it appears in such a way that the wound correals to the lowest part of the leg where it is; That the bowel is cut lightly, and nothing of the bowel is left.
That the bowel is cut lightly, and nothing of the bowel is left. And take consolidating medicines to heal the wound, and they are laid on a flaxen cloth that covers the entire wound. Then apply as much force as possible to the narrower part of the chest, and lay another flaxen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and place it over the wound of the sore to align the bowel, and do not leave the large cloth until after one more time.
And the one who is sore at the wound of the chest often presses on the bowel, and examines what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or not, or too much, or not enough, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, and if the patient feels pain or not, and when your medicine has been extended and you see the nature that it is ascending and if the chest seems to be already broken, and approach the health.
and then take off the bandage either in the morning or at night, and when you examine the wound, if it changes to another fold, and change the dressing.
And if the venomous substances are found after a long time, do not despair of your health, as the health is approaching.
For he has many times injured his wounds with sharp things, and those who do the opposite.
and if the belly is indigestible and jumps after one night, thinks that the chest is not broken.
And if the shoulder is late in healing, and it is treated, if the dry medicines are moistened in substance and fresh in virtue, as specified, because it has a large part of vitrol, and this is the rear medicine.
If the ointment is specified, and it is made with rose oil, and the wine is mixed in small amount;
Then it is preserved and used.
And the same thing is made honey cooked, when the ointments are not present, or you take razor and oil and incense, and the powder, and the honey when it is on fire;
Then in glue I drapel, and stretch it around the neck, and never once has an astrologer given any advice on this, and the roots of these celestial herbs, which is also like flour and cinnamon. and in use of simple or compound drugs: break them, and make a powder, and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it.
and if the wound is long, and not cured by this cure, then you should know that the decay has begun, and it makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs. If the treatment of the fistula cure is as we have said before.
Panacea is an aphrodisiac that often cures the thumb of the hand, or finger, or by chance in other parts;
And when it is infected, and it is not guarded, if the aphrodisiac comes out, and runs and soaks the wound as far as the root of the finger, and by chance it runs all over;
And there comes the corrosion to the bone, as far as it comes with pain, and the head of the joint is wide, and the color is changed;
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that is growing from the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
And if the nail presses on the bone, and begins to prick, and darkens, then you should remove the part of the nail that points at the bone, and cut it off high up, and cope with the remaining part of the nail subtly and gently, and put on the remnant of the nail with medicines that are hot and corrosive to heal everything. Then the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
And if corrosion is in the bone, and it is coped, and taken out, because as much as the bone corrupts and is, so it cannot be healed.
If you see the second bone corroded, if the copes in I are as described, then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
And if it is frozen, and cut it off, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary to first cleanse it.
Then cut the nail of the frozen toe with a sharp knife, and make sure the cut does not go through the skin, because the patient will feel too much pain.
And if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
The elbow dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is very common, and it often happens without causing any damage, and never causes a fracture, and no one is born with this deformity, or the birth is not in any of us from the two.
Those who do not move at all in any joint, and those who are moved at the frozen joint, by chance stay still.
The size of one who is lame is as follows: The size of one who is lame is as the root of a wide spatule.
He who has pain in the root of the joint is difficult to cure: If you hold tight to the pain.
In the event of a fracture that needs to be treated from the back, if you are able to first cover the bone with a suitable cloth, then cover the bone with a bandage, and then treat it until it is healthy.
The symptoms that come are those that come from birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from other things.
If you cover that spot with your hand, then it should repair according to its natural forms: Then put between two cloths or flannels made wet with rose oil, so they do not stick: Or you put between two pieces of soft cloth, as long as it does not stick, if it comes out:
When the patient touches either of his two hands with his thumb, if it is not too painful, then it should be done.
Giant veins filled with excess melancholic fullness come from more and more limbs of the heavy body.
And more come in the legs of those who go to church and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, it is necessary that you never administer any purging of colic, and then the proper dosage of the basilicon.
The iron cure is followed in two ways: One is to cut and draw the black blood; And the other way is if you love the vein, and cut it all through.
The size is followed in this way: First, the first leg of the hot, strong ankle is raised until it is not subtle, then the knee of the patient is strained to the part below the knee of the groin.
Then close the vein with your hand, either with one, two, or three fingers, of a large size, then lift and take out the dark blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as you can, as much as the patient's strength allows.
Then tie it off and command that it be painted with black meat juice.
And continue the evacuation and cleaning as the veins become clear, and inform the patient.
The lesions of the dislocated joint are caused in this manner: Straighten the patient's leg, if it has hair, then wash it with warm water, and make the leg red hot until it turns red, and dilate the veins.
And if you do not have a fire, if the cauterization is done with heat, and then the point is placed where the vein is long and thin at the head of the thigh, or in the part below the ankle.
Then apply the leather to the wound, and scarify the vein in every part, as soon as it appears when touched.
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or the leather seems as if it were a bluish cord;
Then bind the wound tightly, as soon as it is healed with leather, and then cut at the ankle lightly, then the thread is passed through the other leg, three times.
Then scorch the skin on the vein as much as it appears, then soften it with oil, just as you have done, and it can be used for another incision, just as you have done first.
Then cut a larger size, or more like it, then soften it, and then lay it flat, and then tie it to the second size.
Then extract the limb in the size, as far as it will go, then soften it.
And if you do not manage to lift it and straighten it, if it does not come out with a needle as strong as double thread, then soften it, tie it, and pull it out, and cut your hand from both sides, until it comes out. and make sure it does not break, for if it breaks, and cannot be treated or lifted, it causes harm to the patient.
and when you have fully treated it, place the wound of the hairy skin with fine linen soaked in wine and rose oil. and keep it until it is healthy.
And if the wound is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you cut it off violently, do not cut it off, but if it is not straight. and the skin is stretched as we have said before.
The form of iron used when cutting the eye if it is hard, and does not cut through, is that it does not cut through the vein.
and is a thick nail, because if it were fine, it would cut through the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
This vein is joined in the legs, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture.
and by chance grows in another part than in the legs, and this comes from the fat that comes out of the skin, as it does from the tail of a snake and towards, joined between the skin and the arm.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, as if from the root of a plant.
When the head is opened, if you cover one end of a piece of lint with one and a half fingers, and hold it there, and leave the lint on the leg, and every time it is not closed, if the lint covers the end of the lint, and the now;
and if it is too long, if you cut off a part, and cover the remaining part with lint, and do not cover the root as much as it is all out; for if you cut it off, it will enter the body, and bring forth pus and blood, or the limb, and serious illness;
For this particular thing, it is necessary that it be treated as soon as possible and quickly, and nothing else or more remains.
And there is no time for this vein when it is treated with V hands of length, or X, and some came to me before, which was X hands of length, and when you press, if it hurts or punctures, and the hole is small, then all is well.
And let the matter be digested, and administer the medicine to the patient without any food for one hour, then the cure is like that of the abscesses.
And there is no time for this vein hands to be closed, and at the same time when it opens in the joint of the shoulder or the shoulder, and if there is pain, and it jumps out of its place;
If you have followed our advice before, then you will know how to treat it.
Of those that are born between leather and horsehair. This disease is known in our country as "beef disease," because it often occurs with many wounds, and is a sharp pain that travels from the skin to the bone, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt throughout the limbs, until it reaches the skin or bone, and then it jumps.
and is caused by an excess of certain humors, such as worms that come and go in the belly, and snakes and limbs and Ascaris.
and one wonders about its maliciousness, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and comes to the brain, by chance it enters, and destroys the brain. And this often happens.
When you see it being cured and treated, if not, when it will be.
If it comes to pass that you read the lever of the shoulder and below a strong ligament well tightened, then pull on it and cut it off, and it will be firmly fixed in place, and you will not need to sew it, if the cauterization by fire is done as follows:
and the greatest harm it can cause, if it goes to the oil, as we have said.
And if you see it coming towards or near the oil, hold it firmly by the horn, and cut off the cauterization; then pull it out.
1. It is necessary to use the cautery of the maltreats to dissolve the solutions of drugs for the humors, and to avoid foods that are not pure for nourishment.
From the pain that comes from dislocation 2. This disease is called "wakir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to any part of the body, and spreads from one part to another.
3. And I see what you say. 4. I was called to a woman who had been treated with a cautery, and I saw my arm, and saw a small pimple in the vein of the arm.
5. And later, I saw it rise as if it were a snake in the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if it were living silver when it cuts through the flesh.
The pain leaves that limb, and it tightens in the shoulder, and then a while later spreads throughout the body, so much so that it comes to the other shoulder.
Then it tells me that it dislocated itself further towards the front of the body, just as I see.
I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease in this manner. Indeed, I wanted to ensure that the pain moved from one part of the body to another, but I could not make it happen, just as I see in the woman.
I thought it was because the woman had a stiff chest, and the veins were exposed, and because that constriction appeared.
And it is not apparent to those who do not understand this reason that those who are delicate have moist skin and veins that have been replenished.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels pain, if it opens as we have said, if the limb is not held tightly, and then released as much as the constraint allows to the limb; and cauterize the limb;
And if you do not see it with your eyes, whether the cure of this that relieves the constraint is like pills made from the dried flesh of fish and other similar things;
Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the bones of the hand or they pierce.
The variety of their wounds is that some have large points, and small, and hairs, and sores. and of those with angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are pieces.
and the one who does not find in any limb according to any way. or in the principle member, if it is like the brain, liver, spleen, lung, heart, intestine, uterus, and other members. When she finds that she does not find in any limb of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears. If it comes to your mind that you should remove this arrow, because of the death that follows in many cases. And when you notice that it is not a lie, and the arrow is not in front, then remove it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of a fracture when the arrow pierces the bone, and the shock that is felt there is when there is scotomy and soreness and shivering and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of cold; and by chance it is without eyes or ears. And by chance, the word and the voice; and a leap of the white, moist wound, resembling a roar of a bull.
and this is the sign you see, if you hold the cure, and draw the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it is drawn or pulled is that it is near the left shoulder, and it feels as if it is stuck in something hard, not empty. And by chance, the arrow is also silent, and in black blood, and comes with cold and very cold, and sinks. The patient does not doubt that the death has set in.
And the sign of the arrowhead that does not come out is that there are no plains of ecchymosis, a sudden drop in the wound, the throat swells, and the face turns pale, and he sighs high and cries out in pain.
And if the arrowhead is found in the covering of the chest, it is difficult to find the small ribs. and there is great pain and suffering. and they move all the limbs of the shoulder.
2. If the arrowhead is found in the stomach by chance, if it jumps from the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
3. If the arrowhead is found in the stomach and in a sudden jump through the intestine, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead is found in the bladder, and the urine comes out suddenly and forcefully, and the patient feels great pain. The patient suspects that the wound is fatal.
The other member, if the face and chest and shoulder and arm and spine and back and shoulders, and the limbs seeming, are saved according to other dispositions. When the artery is in the loins or the limb, and it is not visible, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are doing it.
It came to my home one day, a arrowhead that was thrown into the root of the neck. I tried to touch it, and from the other side, I removed the grease from the ear, and it was painful.
And I found a bone that was stuck in the grease of the oil of the paper, and it was firmly fixed, and it could not be removed except for the tip towards the other side, and it was as large as a Turkish archer's arrow, making it easy to remove with light blows on the ears.
I managed to remove it, and I never had any accidents.
And I found a bone from the throat in a cheese, and it was the Arabic bone with ears.
I was aware of the barbs, and they were very subtle as I touched them, and they were healthy crests.
I touched a thorn in my foot, which was long or flat, and I thought it would kill me.
and then if it had not changed its position after XXX days. I removed the thorn, I applied pressure, and it stopped bleeding, and there were no other accidents.
And if your foot or leg has a wound from a thorn, and the wound is deep or large, and it does not heal quickly.
and the thorn did not leave the wound, and it did not change its natural position, and it was not found in any of its natural works.
And see if another man, who struck a shaft in his face, was wounded by the wound. and delayed before suffering great pain.
and did not have other similarities.
And shot an arrow at the king's son, who was swollen in the middle and was slightly bent to the left. and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called for the cure after it had been swollen for three days. If the wound was very tight.
I tried to treat it with all my subtle methods and did not feel any pain. and he felt a sharp and painful sensation in his left ear.
I thought that it was the tip of the arrow I put the sharp, dry, and easily cuttable bone in the wound, because the arrow did not burn. and I saw that it was the arrow.
and I saw that it was the arrow. I inserted the sharp bone into the wound, and the right side of the skin was cut, and it took a long time for the pain to subside, until the patient felt the bone leave his body.
and he told me. I applied the medicated plaster to the wound, as thick as possible, and it stuck, and I felt the point of the arrow that was stuck in the skin.
Then, in the opening of the wound, by the use of that medicinal herb, until the head of the arrow appeared visible.
And it took well over four months to heal, and then the wound was lanced, and I removed all the needles, both sides, and could not stop.
Therefore, I continued to refine and invent methods of lancing, as long as the needles were well made, according to the form that would come at the end of this chapter, as I opened the wound.
And the bone was judged not to be able to be restored. I will restore it therefore, and was soothed by the wound, and was cured completely by the patient.
I said the quality of removing some arrows, if you put your care on what I do not say, because the books cannot all become dirty.
but the skilled masters compare well with a few great things, and with what is present and lacking, true nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of things that come into this art.
I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are fixed in four ways: If by the shoulder or if they enter, or from another part.
And that which jumps out by the arm or it enters, is a wound that enters the flesh, and it does not jump out at all now.
And if it does not jump now, if it leaves it as long as the wound is raw and open, and the exit is open.
And if it becomes stuck in the bone, and it cannot be pulled out if it is not left alone for a while, and each day.
And then it jumps out, and if it does not jump now, if it is pierced from the inside as much as the wound is healed and made smooth, and then it comes out.
And if the shoulder is reduced to the head of the humerus bone and cannot be seen, if you want to try everything. If you feel it, if there is no instrument available for reduction.
If you do not have the strength to reduce it, and for the sake of the wound, and there is no pulse or movement, if the pain is such that the wound is large.
If you reduce the arrow, and if it has ears in the shaft, and they hold, then the bone that is marked with II parts of the mace that you can pull, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, as far as you can draw it.
And carefully, even if you do not break the arrow, you should pull it more firmly.
If you do not once, if the hair is still long and even until it grows, then cut it, because the extraction is painful. And if the dislocations of the shoulder cause further harm, then it is not what we have advised in this chapter of the treatise.
And if you need the incision of the flesh and vein, and put in a comment that you can treat the arrowhead without causing harm, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently.
And put the patient according to the shape of the arrowhead when it was in the shoulder, because it is the greatest help to him, and if you do not know, then follow what the sign shows you.
The arrowhead that comes from another part, or it does not open anything of his, or the skin is shrunk in some place where you can see or feel it.
The head is then cut open, as soon as the nails can take hold, and then it is pulled out. If you jump now.
The second line translates to: "And if it is held in the bone, if your hand turns round as it enters the bone, then it expands the bone, then pull it out.
And if she cannot come out, leave it for a while and then resume the extraction as soon as it comes out.
and if it is the arrow, cut it off at once.
and if it is not the arrow, and you see that the instrument is being administered, if the tip of the arrow is in the handle of the instrument, then it is not a problem.
and then cut it off, and if the arrow is in the handle of the instrument, and the instrument is being cut at the tip entering, to lighten the extraction.
If the arrowhead is embedded, then you must cut through the entire arm or the poison is released, and then treat the wound as best as you can.
If the dislocation is in the shoulder, hip, abdomen, or chest, and it is forward, and you then cover it, it will hold.
and keep covering the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound, as best as possible. and treat it until it is healthy.
The shape of the arrowhead's barbs that are used to extract arrows resembles the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
And there are several ways to do this: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the pointed hair is like that of a squirrel's tail, with the point at the tip of the arrowhead, just as shown.
Veins that are healthy have 31, if it has a head of 16, it means: The bats that are after the ears, which are called the "two herbs and the two arteries that appear in the temples and the veins that are in the hairy parts of the eyelids, which are called "sprigs and the vein that is in the forehead and the vein that is at the top of the head and the two glands that are on the cheek and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, and these are called "swollen" veins and the veins that are below the tongue
The bones of the arms that are commonly considered to be five in number are:
One is the humerus, which is the lateral side of the chest, and it is called the "shoulder bone" by people. The shoulder joint is called the "shoulder joint" by people, and it is composed of the humerus and the scapula. The scapula is the shoulder blade, which is located on the side of the chest, and it is called the "shoulder blade" by people. It is situated below the clavicle and is the one that can be felt when the pouch is opened.
And the saved vein is the one between the auricula and the anus, and if it rains.
and in the leg and where the thighs are three veins. One is the vein that is exposed due to the scar on the opposite side of the chest, and the second one is the vein that is exposed at the ankle on the other side of the chest. and the vein called "nise," which is in the ankle of the other side of the chest.
and in the other leg, there are three veins exposed that are not those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears can be helped by old catheters and implants.
And the quality of health is such that if I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and clean the limb or the wounds with a cloth as rough as hair. Then the patient's neck is strained, as long as the wounds are visible behind the ears, in the same direction as the head. If you want to tie the knots to your hand, and if you feel the pain in your thigh, then sign.
Then take the scalpel, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then hold your hand tightly over all the wounds, and cut and sew the vein as well as you can, and make sure to remove as much blood as possible, and see.
Then the strain and pain, as long as it is healthy.
And I have already said the incision and the cauterization or first book.
The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating ancient, and soaked, and used to customary, and in the course of the watery tears have eyes;
and the quality of the health if it is so that I say: and it is that the patient is straining his chest, as long as the two veins are open widely; and you feel the cold breath of your dog, and then you see it increase;
Then gently press on the vein at the top of your index finger, remove the lancet, and gently hold the vein and the capillary, just as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need.
Then remove the restraint, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place cotton. And then close it, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of its strength and extraction, where to begin the book.
The health of the vein at the front is as good as the health of the cranial vein for old facial diseases, migraines, and bruising.
If the patient is able to pull his neck back while twisting, as soon as the vein is exposed. Then take the instrument called "forceps," whose shape is like this:
And place the tip on the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or another object, and let the blood ooze out according to the amount you see. Then loosen the patient's neck, and hold the vein as long as it is pulsating and never let go of it with a wide flame.
In all cases, it should only be the flames that are too large. And the safe way across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the arteries when it is subtle.
The safety of the two veins that are in the two arms if they help the limbs, and the thigh, and the wound, and the orifice in the skin, and diseases of the face.
and the quality of their safety if it is that the patient strains his neck by twisting without any ligament, as before.
Then the safe way, and if the safe way is long, a short part of artery is broken, because there is no bone. If the flames are subtle, by chance they are very sharp.
Then make a deep incision, as much as you can, and then cut the skin, and it will heal well.
The health of the vein is not good if it is thin, and it can cause problems such as sores, wounds, and skin diseases, similar to eczema and rashes that occur in the skin, especially when they are old.
And the quality of the skin is good if it does not itch, then gently pull the neck towards you, and take the subtle flame long and check if the eyelid is between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now the pain will start to increase, and the wound will begin to heal.
And do not alert too much, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need, then lie down for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The saffron of the second kind helps with the relief of colic, at the beginning of mealtime, and for many diseases, empetigines, corrosions, herpes, and esthenia.
And the quality of the saffron if it is the patient who strains his neck on both sides, as we have said.
And if the master is standing on the chest of the patient, and the patient lies on his side, then the vein is stretched widely, then draw out enough blood, as much as possible.
Then perform another incision in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and draw out the veins gently, so that the patient does not suffer. and leave it as is, so that the wound is healed.
Of the health of the deer If the health of the teeth of the deer is aided in the mouth, it helps to prevent decay of the gums, and cracks in the teeth, and toothache.
And assess the quality of the wound if it is necessary to tie the gauze in front of you, and pull on its collar as I have said. Then turn the cheek, and look at the veins, one of which is on the left cheek and the other on the right, and distinguish them by their dark color and because they have thin dark veins.
1. If you do not know how to do it, and you are in doubt, then try the largest one of each part, and do two wounds that are similar, because it is a different method.
The tongue of the sick person is diseased. 2. If the wounds of the lips are not healed after the healing of the head, and it is the strangulation of the mouth, and there are diseases of the eyes, and there are diseases of the mouth;
3. and if you can qualify the wound if the patient is between your hands before the sun, and you touch the tongue, and look at each costal bone a black wound;
The patient should exercise both sides equally, and not push too hard, as the arteries are on the opposite side.
The veins that are commonly exercised are healthy in two ways.
If pricked at all parts of the body, or with a thin needle like a thorn, and are called "aneth". And they are large and thin according to the width and thinness of the veins. The form of the fire cautery is such that it is named after a certain flower, and it is wide as you see.
And it is able to open the veins with thick hair that contain large clots and trouble. And it is the form of the thin needle.
It is more delicate to apply, and it is safer for the veins, or if there is delicate sodium citrate.
The health of the basin, which is one of these veins, if it helps with diseases that are full of throat, and of collarbone, and of stomach, and of abdomen.
and it is necessary for the physician that he cures wisely, and that he attacks the artery that is full. And if he cuts the artery, and the blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said. and should not be too sharp-pointed the fire, but cut it as we can.
And if the basin does not open clearly, then it is necessary to pull on it and change another one. If you do not want any rain from it, or if you heal in the vein of the arm: It is open clearly: And the cloth is on fire, as we have said:
And if you see the vein of the wound, then it is necessary that you hold the arm steady while touching the vein as far as you can feel the pulse: Then sign the vein to stop it, and then hold the arm steady, and touch the burning cloth: and make sure that you do not injure the artery when you see the vein swell, because it is the artery: The first sentence to translate is "Eschui la donques." The translation of this phrase is not clear without additional context, as it does not follow a standard grammatical structure or provide enough information to determine its meaning. However, based on the provided text, it seems to be a command or instruction, possibly related to the previous sentence about dislocations. Therefore, a possible translation could be: "Show the way.
The second sentence to translate is "Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:". A possible translation could be: "And if you see it coming out as high as the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, you should know that it is not blood:". This translation assumes that the sentence is describing a medical condition or symptom, and the use of the word "artere" (artery) suggests that the speaker is comparing the appearance of the discharge to that of an artery. However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation. The third sentence to translate is "Haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avaint:". A possible translation could be: "Hasten and place your finger far away, then observe if it is without pain, which often happens:". This translation assumes that the sentence is providing medical advice or instructions for a patient. The use of the word "estainche" (pain) suggests that the speaker is advising the patient to check for discomfort when placing their finger in a certain position. However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation. The patient should tie their arm, and leave it alone, and do not move the affected limb.
and remain still, and do not move until it is safe.
And if the wound is not dressed, and it becomes infected, and the doctor is not present, then the artery may open, as the head of the arrow retreats. and dress the wound.
And take a scalpel, and make it sharp, and take one of the halves and hold it well against the other edge.
If the wound is not dressed, that's good. If not, then if the treatment is poultices that draw out blood.
And the poultices do not cause much pain in other positions due to the small wound of the wound, and the relief is given to the arm.
The health of the vein in its environment is aided if it treats the wound with blood and corns, because it is composed of basilic and cerebral, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the patient to rest on the nerve that is inflamed, and if it does not become too much, and the nerve becomes inflamed, and the swelling increases, and the health becomes painful, and by chance it cannot be cured.
When the skin is cut many times, and it does not open by itself due to its thinness, then you must use the instrument to open it. And pull out the skin from your wound.
And if there is vein between the two nerves, if they are not long enough.
If the head wound is helped, it attracts blood to the head, and helps the eyes.
And it is better to touch the olive or mint leaf, as it is safer for all wounds, because it does not harm the skin or arteries. In general, it is better to use a lighter instrument, and do not cause pain the first time, and then continue. And by chance, some men have read it for the first time, but it causes no harm.
The quality of health is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about health, if it is not already known, is to keep it and avoid diseases.
And make your health in one of the three veins that are cut: This is to know, the cranial, fast, and abdominal. And you must take care of your health at the beginning of fasting, and during and after diving, when the sign of repletion appears.
And it must be done on the first day or the second, after two hours or three days.
The one who is being treated for diseases has no definite cure, but when it comes to relieving pain or fatigue, in all hours and at all times.
And it is not necessary to treat children under the age of 14, nor women who are only a quarter of a month pregnant. The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into
And if any is found to be healthier, in whatever way that may be, if it helps to open the intestines of a light cyst, if there are many feces retained, and if the wounds do not reach the intestines which are unnecessary and harmful to the principal members.
Neither the fat nor the lean meat that is too much, nor the yews, whether it is or not, nor the hydropathic.
And it worsens the health after passionate colic, vomiting, abdominal dislocation, and frequent urination in women, traveling, and eating, and all the virtue, or by something of the arm or tight clothing.
Then refine the humors, if it is not thin, by meat and drinks and medicines, if you can afford it.
Then take a bath or a wash, nothing helps, by refining the blood, and stay healthy until the third day, as we have said.
and keep that of the day's work, and pain, and pleasure, and such things.
and be careful and vigilant, and use the more elevated of the two hands that you have, and gently rub the arm twice or three times, then pull the limb away in a straight line, as it is too tight or small, if it cannot be corrected without;
and then gently rub the wrist with your hands, as long as the veins throb and you feel them;
then use the more elevated of the two hands with a little oil, then place your left hand on the vein opposite the wrist as much as possible, so that the vein does not hurt or fail to heal;
For it has veins that flow like cords to the healer, and if they are so many that they are plainly visible, then when one puts the fire on them, if they retreat from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those; and if the vein is opened, then it is the wound too tight, because then the healer must be advised in these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good. And if not, then it continues a little later in the same place or suddenly, if it is not shortened.
And if it is read that it is deformed, and the patient becomes anxious, leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the arm. By chance, chancery comes to visit.
Do not enter the bath, then resume the cure if it pleases him.
And if the wound is small, or it is not cut subtly and you doubt that there is not so much blood as you see, if proud in that wound you think it is true for all the fire, rightfully.
And the work is done quickly, unless the patient is deformed. When there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh swell, if you do not recouple the joint, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the strong sinews, and makes them moist in this swollen part of the limb that the oil touches.
And frequently apply oil to the healthy part of the limb that you heal the wounds, to strengthen the strong sinews.
And this method also helps to reduce swelling and pain when it is applied to the limb. If it is too thin, do not apply it when it is too thick.
If there are large abscesses that come many times, as soon as it is not healthy but only once when the vein is opened, if you hurry, and put a wet sponge on the affected part and wrap it with a cloth, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no swelling at the site after several days without any blackness or discoloration, if you do not know why. And if you see, put nothing of aloe or re-set in the juice of camomile, myrrh, or similar.
And many times there have been abscesses and appearances of the health of the basilica.
Then place your hand on it, and if the appearance is severe, compress the hand with your own. Do not place anything on it that we have said, for by chance in the incision without damaging the artery.
but I apply it dry to make it hurt the limb, then another treatment, until it is healthy.
2. And treat each sin according to its quantity and the color of the sin.
For if it remains without blood, if it is left as red as possible. And if you see it large, if you let it be as fine as possible. And if it is too hot, then let it cool down.
And it is good for the one who is in pain and suffering, and has experience in extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it will be healthier and often, and it should be made stronger by cutting through, not by pricking.
And this way of strengthening is saved from the recurrence of blood and nerve weakness, and it is worth noting that the long wound is not wide.
And for the one whose heart needs strength, it is good to give soft bread in the juice of grenaded pomes. If it is frozen, if it drinks thrice or four times cold water. And if it has a cold complexion, if it presses before the warm bread dough into honey or honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
If he sweats after being made healthy, after the passage of blood, if it is necessary that he sweat char and sweet-smelling honey, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of sincope, for the evacuation of wind.
If he sees his arm swelling and becoming redder each time, if it happens, when he is weakened by great pain, which he becomes more and more weak, according to the amount of his virtue which continues to increase.
If he sees his arm swelling and becoming redder after the first time of pain, and he feels strong, if he is healthy seven hours after the first pain, or after the next hour.
If he seems to be getting stronger from another part, if he needs to be stronger on the second day or the third.
For it has thirst for blood that the body which is already frozen has, and brings on fever. If it comes to draw great quantity of blood, and open the abscess as much as it can. Then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the wound as soon as it is clean, so that the death does not come from the pus, and this often happens when the healthier ones are neglected.
When you see the arm slip out of its place, and make it bleed again, and the wound is closed, then you must form your fingers tightly. If the arm is stiff, then extend it gently, as that would be harmful.
But leave it alone until the second time. Or you do not cut at the tip of the flame, until the part that is frozen from the vein oozes out and put it in boiling water, and gently press it.
If the vein is inflamed, if it is left and not tightened, as long as the abscess is appeased.
If necessary, treat the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in another arm.
The arm that holds the vein is healthy because it is composed of the shoulder.
And the way to clean it if the patient boils their hand in hot water until the redness subsides.
Then it is linked in a proper manner, if the vein appears well, then the proper way now through, no large or long wound.
And the wound is large, and is healing well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, then place the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow through it until you have enough.
And if this is not possible, then place the hand in warm water, as it will be more in the pit than here.
The healing of this vein is more safe from all other veins, than if it has not been cut or nerved.
The health of the saved hand is worth all the diseases of the left hand, and this is the way:
Strain the hand, and pour hot water on it until the vein is cold, if you can; and if you can pass your hand through it, and if it does not hurt at all, then there is no harm.
and do not force it too far, because the bones are dry and lacking in cartilage, and then put your hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
And when you have treated as much blood as is customary for your skill, if you put the vein oil and seal it tightly, and then make a thread for each rain.
The patient with the injury in the left hand if it is of the mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said towards the right.
The health of the sore if it is of all diseases that are not good for the heart, like diseases of the lungs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the arms, and legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its healing if it is that the patient can pass his hand in hot water and fry the vein as it bleeds, and then loosen the joint without pain. When the vein is at the ankle, and by the doctor's order, it should not be pricked with a needle.
If the vein is small or large, or at the ankle, it is worth mentioning.
And if you follow your doctor's order, if there are nerves that are not in place, and the vein is traversed as it should be.
And the blood flow is normal.
And if you cannot cleanse it with soap, then put your hand in the fire and let the vein dry out well.
And if the patient improves the first time, if the second time it does not last more than a short time because the disease is salt.
Do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and now I will make a salve of the other doctor in the same way.
The salve for the sciatica wound is at the ankle of the foot, and its effectiveness is equal to the pain of the thigh, when it is full of pus.
And the quality of his health if he has been or bathed, and draws out from his ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open.
And if it opens, then the healthy person in all ways that you can think of, and across. And it is worth copying, for the text is read and it is returned to male hands.
And it is worth copying, for the text is read and it is returned to male hands. And if you do not copy, then no healthy person of the one who opened or at the back of the door, and towards the little door, and it will be granted to you.
And make so many incisions of blood that you see, and then the link is cut off, and it is tied with thread and it is tightened. The patient is now healthy.
Vacuum pumps are made of horn, or iron, or glass.
and vacuum is created in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
And this vacuum creation, which is made by cutting, is done in two ways: either it is entirely on fire, or on fire.
and the vacuum creation that is made by cutting and extracting blood is made in twelve hours, with all the wounds being completely closed. and the other is left open. and two more in the other cheek; and the suction of the mouth; and the suction of the other two shoulder blades; and the suction of the groin; and the suctions of the inner arms; and the suctions of the legs; and the suctions of the ankles;
and the suction does not treat any blood, rather it is for thin veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore it does not cause any harm, as we do with wounds; and it is only necessary that it be moistened, and not with any fire or heat, in no disease that comes from overeating, as long as the chest is dry.
And if necessity comes from diseases, or for habits, if the midwife comes every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in each ten;
For there are those who, when they have to assist at childbirth, have heavy burdens.
And if there are those who, when they become swollen and bleeding in their face, in their cheeks, and at the navel, and in the belly, have heavy burdens.
And those who have a thirst for blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit out blood. If they have such things as wounds that prick, and see blood and death and similar things.
When we see these signs, and at the same time when it is three hours after midnight, we command our patient to fast.
The health of the liver helps in the treatment of long hair… that comes as it is, and it is only necessary after the evacuation of all the blood.
And this ventilation is in the head of the liver health, and it is only necessary for those who have a cold complexion or who have been struck, because this does great harm.
And that's why it is only necessary for the watchmen to use those who have or not cold diseases.
And those who often get better soon become obligated, and for this reason, the fasting should be made longer due to the fear of non-compliance.
The patient's neck winding is in the chest of the main and the basilica, and for this it is useful in the emergency of the pinch, and for the cutting of the bone of the ear, and to all, and for filling;
and it is meant to be tightened, because it holds too tightly, if it causes indigestion or stomach and or liver;
The winding of the collar is as the costels of the neck, and it causes pain in the head, and it hurts and pulls, and in the strangulation, and in the pain of the roots of the teeth, and it is in the chest of the main;
And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to express their hand when putting on, so as not to harm the artery and cause further wounds.
The windings of the throat are often due to disease of the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, as well as similar diseases in the mouth. And it is found in the lips of the cold sweats of the two lips.
The second line of the translation is: "Wounds on the shoulders are caused by diseases that come from chill and fullness.
The windings of the cheeks are as much as three fingers of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
And instruct the patient not to draw too much blood, because the vein is naked and knows how to avoid nerves and arteries.
The device that is placed on the chest if it is not done with great care can cause injuries and diseases, and it must be large enough to have the ability to well treat. and by chance, if it is not done subtly, it may break. and it causes great pain.
If the devices on the legs are open, they attract blood from all parts of the body and relieve old pains from the arms, uterus, bladder, and vagina, and draw out the hair.
and they are on the limbs of the second and third toes, and all of them cause pain in the body after being worn for a long time, and bring about swelling in various positions.
The manner to insert the bougie (cannula) if you put it initially empty, and then subsequently, and move it gently, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and swollen part of the urethra, and the opening of the abscess.
Then, close it, and put the bougies back in their original position, as some have such a problem that they cannot manage to hold them. If it is necessary to cut once only, and make large incisions, and a smooth surface. and then gently suck.
And if it is not thin, if it cuts twice: The first time to subtly open the vein of large blood.
And if it is not done quickly, then it can be injured for the third time.
And when we want to draw out small amounts of blood only once. And if we are not afraid to draw blood often.
And if it is not done quickly, then it should be stopped if the pain is severe and noticed immediately, and for those who have thick skin and hard hair, and who have long nails, that you oint the ends of the veins with the oily, dissolving ointments of the apothecary: If it is of this nature, from oil of saffron, or sweet almond oil, or oil of the seeds of cucumber.
And if it is of this kind, from the oil of lemon, or lavender, or chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the excess is large and cold, then take warm oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and apply them.
And if the skin is tender and large pores, it is not recommended to apply oil, but it is recommended to wash after the application of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or onion water, or porcelain water, or any other similar.
And if the one with wet moisture, if it rises from honey, or rose water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine vinegar, or ague of seuc, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar ones.
And it is not necessary to take a cold shower before the bath, but after the bath, an hour or two.
And do not fall asleep after the ventilation, and it is necessary to wake up when it is time to ventilate and when it is being ventilated.
And if the one who is healthy is cold, and the other is too much and inflamed. If it is necessary to consume cold things, such as lettuce and endive and spinach, and similar things. and drink punch, and hot charcoal, and moist meats.
and drink punch, and hot charcoal, and moist meats. And if the one with a cold complexion consumes honey syrup and aromatic wine that is between vinegar and wine, and drinks punch, and drinks punch and small pieces of cheese and pickles.
When the joint is dislocated, if it must move more than a little, then it requires more drinking than urine.
It is necessary to give some men once a triaicle or muscate before the operation, or afterward, to comfort the main members. And make sure they are quiet without, but only those who are drunk should be made quiet.
The vents that are made to hurt are those that are made above the liver, and the gallbladder, and rheumatism, and the stomach, and the bowels, and the intestines, because this member does not suffer from external wounds, and only from internal pain when we make it move from one part to another, as we do with the uterus when it is unhealthy.
For the viscosity that is in the member, if we use suction on the abdomen and the belly to relieve the member.
And ease the pain, when it is inflamed or pierced, if it is attracted by chance to the inflammation, or if it pulls away from its place.
And it is done when it is placed on the liver and the mouse when it has retained inflammation, and these suctions are administered empty by sucking only. And never have they been administered together with fire, and never have they been thinned with cold tea, as in some diseases that cause sorrow, and in this way one fills the suction with hot water or with water that has been cooked with edible herbs.
The form of the fire cautery is:
And it has two large and half palm-sized scales on each side, and it either costs a little too much for the little pus, as if to bush a needle, and it is of rainwater, so that it does not rust the surgeon's hand when putting it on the limb.
and in the environment, it has a tooth of rainwater or iron to wear a tight glove, and it is both large and small according to the diseases and the pain of those who take them.
For the suction cups of children are not like gills, but thin and lean.
And should one put this suction cup on the limb?
The patient should use the wax cauterization or liniment and insert it into the hole through the vein that has been made, so that the wax is at the end of the vein hole to prevent the heater from burning the patient.
and then place it on the affected part, and you should be at the vein that we have mentioned, if you see, if there is vapor coming out, and then remove the vein.
and use the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you have skill.
In the vein that is in a state of distress due to coughing and cold, there is no hole or windpipe, and it is not in a state of being until it is clear of the cold, and it is placed on the affected part only.
1. "And it is the form: [the following lines are missing]
Without being harmed, only in parts where there can be ventouses for their small size, like lips and genitals, and similar parts. and in them of horsehair, if they are not or not, and other similarities.
and the quality of the hair if it is that when you find wet hairs that are not rough, and if they take them.
and they put a nut in wet hair, as long as they are not pregnant, and have no belly. and then it is clean of the vein and the wound, then clean the member as much as it is red, and put on the hairs.
When they are flat and smooth, and if it is the shoulder or neck, put a pocket around it, as this is best.
If not, then lift the arm from the shoulder, and then from the elbow, well, and then straighten it.
If it is too tight after the arm is straightened, if the cold wet linen is not stretched enough, then put it on, as long as the arm is not stretched out.
If the linen is multiplied, then put on vitrol or gas, and similar things, as long as it is stretched.
If you put half of the burned skin on the thigh and leave them as they become dry on the thigh, it will now be firm.
And if you use more of it, if you take others without.
And if the threads will not take, if you clean the thigh with cold water or use a needle as follows: first insert it, and then place them as they feel the cold, until they dry.
And when you see that they are cold, if you powder a small piece of aloe and silk or charcoal, it will now be cold.
Here begins the book of fractures Many chapters are necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
1. "Consider the force of the fire cautery, that the patient will not find any ancient books or letters.
2. "And for this reason, the science is strained in our land, as I have never found any book.
3. "And I have not found any book, for the science is strained in our land, as I have studied many books and through experience and habit of my life.
4. "And I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the strangulations that are made, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of words and chapters or the surgeon makes his understanding, and more so if those who have practiced it understand and learn this noble art, and learn to teach others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, twist, or sprain occurs at any joint, if you quickly apply the remedy of both sides of the malady, nothing will fail, as with weakness of the heart, or children, or old age. or if it is not very tense, or too tight.
and if it is too cold, it is known as cold baths, and hot iron and horsehair, and do not drink wine, nor use thin-willed charcoal, and do not fill the veins with blood too much, as long as you have no doubt of apoplexy chaut, or expansion of matter in the member.
If the patient examines the member after his first treatment.
And when the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient from the diet of meats that cause large excitements, or if there is viscosity, like bread cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and sausages, and lard, and fish, and large wine, and similar things. For the excitement gets worse and the fracture heals faster.
And you know that bones broken by fractures and decays cannot be well mended or strengthened according to their nature by the care of members, nor also those which are too soft, like small children's bones.
but there is no cure, first reset the broken bone and large tendons that were split and joined together, as it should have been before. and do not let it stay in its place, and for this reason it is recommended to avoid large meals, as we have said.
And you know that there are many ways to cut.
For the cut of the head is different from the cut of the leg or foot, and I will tell you all the ways of cutting in this chapter. For there is a cut that goes to the bone, and another that only scratches, like the size of a quill to write.
For there is a cut that goes to the bone, and another that only scratches, like the size of a quill to write. And if it is a cut with wound, and a cut is just a small slit.
And to have its engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes into his mind.
and it is known that the fracture of the bone by what is in his mind, and is open well by pressure, and some by hand.
And when he has no knots in his way and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
However, it may have knots, or twist, or small fracture. If you can only move it with your hand, but use the medicines that will come after, and then gently pull it now.
And you should know that the fracture that will be in place is the two parts that are disjointed, and it is now necessary to put them together as evenly as possible, unless they cause pain.
When the inflammation subsides and the pain comes, if it is not left alone for any length of time, it will increase.
Then, gently press the affected area with your fingers, and you will notice that the restoration of the joint is lighter than the restorations of other parts or when there are fragments.
Then, pull gently, as it should be done after.
And if it is in the bone with pieces broken off, if you can remove it by hand, or with your fingers, or with some small limbs, or with a cord and your hand;
And he puts the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, it is held by your hands as you please, and you must ensure that the pain does not return to the injured joint.
And adjust the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And it feels good in the hand if it seems not well:
If it grows well and is not overstretched, and does not press too much, do not apply pressure like those who make their wounds larger and contract the limb, as we have often wanted.
And when the limbs are swollen, if the patient is careful not to move them at all, neither during the day nor at night, nor when turning, nor in any other way. and make sure that the limbs are not painful. For when there is no pain, if it is not swollen, and it is necessary to put the limb in a position so that there is no pain.
and make sure that the limbs are not painful. For when there is no pain, if it is not swollen, and it is necessary to put the limb in a position so that there is no pain. and keep it in its place, so that twisting does not occur when you put it back together.
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
It is said that the broken limbs are various in size, width, and shape.
For if he has eaten members, like bread and such, and similar things: If it is necessary to cover the edges of linen and silk with something: And those that are large, like a kex and a leg:
If it is necessary to cover the large linen and silk sheets because they wrap around the entire limb and pull at all parts equally, unless there is any flaw:
Then lightly sew the legs three times or four according to the size of the limb, and then tighten your hand a little on all the linen, then go to the end of the wound and tighten less than the wound, which the wound can enlarge a little;
And gently bend the limb little by little, as you pull on a large part of the healthy leg, then repeat the other limb, and turn it to the correct side over the broken joint.
Then go to the part opposite the break, and extract it gently, not too hard or too forcefully, as we have said in the first chapter;
Then place between the wound edges of linen or cloth, as it is even, then sew it all with threads and then put your stitches well made on, if there is no gangrene or inflammation.
If it has swollen or become infected, and it is made to rest with things that relieve inflammation, and it is left alone for a while.
Then strain your belt, and be made of half a wide rope, or of fur from which they make clothes, or of rains from palm trees, and be in this shape:
But it is necessary that the belt that is put around the wound be a little larger and wider than the others:
and be as long as it is necessary for the member of small or large size: Then tighten the belt as you did in the first place, then tie a string around it, as you did in the first place for the wound: As the joint is stretched further, less.
It is necessary that the string be thin and not too thick, and be of linen.
For if the string is too thick, as I have seen the works of the weavers who make the hours of the linen ropes, and it is a great error, for the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it only requires that there be less space between each thread.
When the patient is anesthetized by the heads of the pins after being shaved clean, if they are not soaked with oil, or greased, if it does not cause pain.
When the wound is treated with a bandage, and the edges are torn, I will explain the treatment for this after.
And it is difficult to avoid breaking all the limbs when pulling on the pins every time. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put on these larger sizes if after V years or VII, or according to your size of the aposteme that is causing the problem.
Here comes the first sentence to translate:
And it comes to pass that you take flour that is fine and well ground, and mix it with a large amount of water, and make this dough, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore the fracture in other positions, and at the same time for women and young children, because it is neither too hard nor too wet.
Another way of fracturing and dislocating and twisting: Take barley, flour, oil, and Arabic gum, and mix them together in the ratio of 1:10. 1. "Mirrors and aloe, ana V З." - This phrase is not clear without additional context. It could be a reference to a specific medical tool or technique, but without more information, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation. 2. "Alechil VIIIII Z." - This phrase is also not clear without additional context. It could be a reference to a specific medical condition or treatment, but without more information, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation. 3. "And then make powder, and mix with animal urine;" - This sentence suggests that the next step in the process is to create a powder using animal urine. The exact purpose of this powder is not clear without additional context. 4. "If the complexion of the face is hot, then use this ointment, because it has good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial for many men." - This sentence suggests that the ointment has the ability to heal broken bones and restore the complexion of the face. The exact ingredients or application method are not clear without additional context.
Other method of plastering that is worth trying: prepare mud and straw, in the ratio of 1:1. mix with water and aloe, in the ratio of 7:1. add ice, in the ratio of 6:1. mix with arsenic and boil well, then cook with vinegar or beer, and administer.
Another method of plastering for joints and bones that are dislocated from their place, to relieve the pain and size used for the bone, and the fracture: prepare new linen, and grind the mud and oil cooked, and put on the wound.
These plasters do not restore flesh, but they are useful for reducing swelling and relieving bone pain.
Other method of plaster that restores broken bones: Use oak bark, dry earth pottery shards, and mix them together to make the plaster.
Another method of treatment for bone fractures and to help reduce swelling: take red clay and mix it with honey and apply it to the limb. Use the root of St. John's wort, chamomile, violets, and flour of wheat for each ingredient.
And mix it with wine, and apply it to the wet or dry elderflower tincture, or other tincture, and use it.
Another method for cleansing more effectively than the first, when an abscess is present and the limb is to be restored. Use the root of St. John's wort, linseed, madder, honey, and a pinch of each ingredient for each part. When the bone is broken, and it is set with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the inflammation of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that no matter how broken the bone is, it can be restored by making a mortar of wax and oil, and nothing else is needed, and he says that it should not be too soft or too hard.
It seems that Galen says that when restoring a broken bone, one should put on things that are dry and warm, like mirr and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to emphasize that it is a wound and pain: Take a piece of cloth and needles of copper, or threads of silk, and thread it, and sew it well, and the wound, and then make an emphasis on it.
And then the patient should wait a while, and take care not to cause pain to the patient, nor to move the bones of his leg. unless it is done by hand. If pain comes to the limb, or itching, tingling, or swelling, if you hurry, and remove it, and now apply the plaster.
and gently wrap it, and wet with seawater, and immerse in cold water, and lift the limb as much as the itching stops, and soothe the pain. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, wet with cold water or rose oil, and wrap around it, until you are sure of no infection.
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then resume the application of the linen cloth, a little plaster, and do not strain it too much. and gently as long as it is healthy.
And if you see that gangrene has set in and there is bruising and pain and swelling, and you have the skill to plaster and bind, if it recurs, as you did at first properly.
And if nothing happens to the limb that we have said, then do not delay more than three days, or four, or seven. and never leave it for more than twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the splinting remains in place and approaches the carpal bone of the hand.
However, the restraint is greater than the first, and it increases its flesh, as I have said before.
and if you see the limb drying more than it should, there is no doubt that the wound will not heal. The first sentence translates to: "Rise when the feverish heat arises, every time you feel it, and keep the limb still.
This sentence translates to: "Due to the feverish heat, the nerves in the limb become numb, and they cause the patient to lose control of the limb, resulting in it being misaligned.
This sentence translates to: "It is unfortunate, and if it continues, I can only offer you pain relief and proper treatment.
This sentence translates to: "There are many types of wounds, and various forms, and the causes are assigned.
Car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d'espee, et le col et les os sont déchiris. Et c'est pour cela que cette façon de brisure est appelée "haichure".
Or le dentel est coupé par les sens perciers, et est appelée ceste façon de brisure "absolue".
Et est la plaie des deux grandes ou petites brisures.
And if it has an impact that is buried, or a cut or from the shattering of the edge, or from the piercing beneath the pierce, or from other such things.
If there is a persistent wound, which is close to the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is under the bone, and this is the wound or large or small.
Et si une plaie est recouverte dans l'os comme des chaussets, et est une petite fendue, et pour cela est appelée cette façon de brisure "capillaire".
If the wound is caused by injury from piercing, or choking, or something similar, and it allows the piece of bone to enter, and it is the same as when they make the hot iron enter the heating; If it enters the wound.
And there are more who have been hurt by moist bones, like children's joints.
and come in all these ways of fracture that light pieces are broken if they are like these. and I will speak about it in his ear.
2. And let us know all ways of fractures by the dislocation they cause, and through inquiries made, and by the crooked one that is caused.
3. The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs it with fire, if the dark fracture is not open, it is not true.
4. In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close watch on the patient, and if you see no such accident, then it is like vomiting of cole, and admission of understanding, and extension, and pulsatility, and fever ague, and the wounds issue and redden, and other signs appear in various dispositions, unless it can be cured with doubt.
If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you expect a cure to begin.
And when the first pain comes to you, and it is in the rib, if it comes before the fourteenth day, then you should see a bone surgeon.
And if it is in this way, if you haste to see the bone before the ninth day, then the cloth that covers the bone is corrupting, and the accident we have mentioned comes.
And if the bone fracture comes near the skin that covers the earlobe, then you must cut off the damaged part.
and it comes that you ignite the head of the patient's shoulder, and cut through the bone in all ways that you can, and through the figure of the wound more so than you can, and it dislocates from the sinus coming to reveal the bone, or abscess, if it helps with what comes, and it comes that you fill the shoulder with softened oils in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is healed and is assured of dislocation of the sinus. Then the bone begins to osteotomy, and it is done according to two ways of opening:
The first line of the translation is: "If one manner is such that you cut at the narrowed end, and it is shaped like this:".
Then there is another cut of a larger size than the first.
And the second line of the translation is: "And if you have many different-sized blades, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron;
And in light work, if you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and dense, then you must perforate it with great care, otherwise you will injure the bone with sharp tools. It should have a margin or a circle around it that does not allow the tip to pass over the bone.
and you will have more, if every bone in your shoulder fits perfectly, if you have paid attention to this test.
And it is the form of the three ways of testing:
The quality of feeling through the broken bone is that you place one test on the bone, and turn it around as much as you can until you feel that the bone is perceived.
Then place the other test a little further on, and then feel all around, then cut into the edges of the bone that are between the holes, and do it as subtly as you can, and gently, as we have said, as you draw the bone with your hand, or with any of the nails, tenailles, pinceures.
And keep your hands away from the skull and the face.
When you have the bone perceived, and treated, if it comes that you reset the cut made in the bone with another instrument seeming like a cautery, but it should be more gentle and subtle than the other cautery;
and if it does not cut any of the small bones, nor the lighter ones of the bones, if they are slightly torn by the strips; then treat the wound with tent and bandages that we have mentioned.
And the other way of opening is when it is said by the Galenic method, which is more correct; And the loud one very much, and that is his word. It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the open fracture is located, so that when you have removed this part, if you measure from the root of this incision, the form is:
And do not cut from one side, and the other part is turned in two pieces, if the cutting is towards the bone.
Then firmly with a small nail, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and then well be careful of the cloth that is soaked.
If it is near the bone, if it touches the bone lightly, because it feels badly, and causes pain.
When the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only covered by soft tissue, and it has small pieces, if they are covered by that roughness, and file down the scales with a subtle raser, you must have several quantities of it to meet each need according to the degree and appearance of the fracture.
If you use a coarse raser first, and then a softer one afterward, and continue to do this as much as it is well.
In each of the other haircuts and subtle wounds, it is necessary to follow according to his command.
And this is something that cannot be answered by the one who placed their study in this art.
And if the suture is discovered, then it is necessary that you apply a piece of linen to the wound according to its size, and grease it with rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another piece of suture doubled in II or III, and grease it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first suture. And do this more gently than you please, as you do not grease the suture, and maintain it with another piece of linen, and do not strain it too much, only as it touches the wound.
And let it lie for one or two days, until the wound is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines as follows: roots of various kinds, flour, powdered frankincense, aristolochic acid, and similar things.
And make a powder of these things, and place it on the wound, and administer further medicine without bittering.
And make sure the wound is clean, and do not apply ointment, nor stitch it up, because when bowstrings are assembled on the skin, they can cause great pain to the patient.
When one puts on a piece of clothing that bites, it can cause discomfort. When a sudden accident comes to the patient, if no one is present, it is uncertain what to do, as we have said, if there is any doubt in the matter.
And if the blacking does not come off except with medicine, which we have applied, then it is recommended that you put a part of honey and three parts of olive oil and one part of glue in a pot, and then apply it to the clothing. Then the treatment is carried out in various ways, as necessary, to make it healthy.
Scars that are never broken are the two parts of the skin that are not cut, or only one, because they are bones.
And this is cartilage, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off your small toe or nail and make the break as equal as possible on your thumb index, and in the pouch according to its natural form. And do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
If the break is in the part of the toe that does not touch the ground, and cannot be reached by the big toe, then you should place it equally at the base of a large finger.
If the break is in the second part, then you should repeat the action, and if you are able to restore the first joint, then do so.
If this is not possible, then after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound has healed and the patient is calm, cut off the toe or nail that is causing the pain, and if the break is in one part.
If you cut one part, the other will also break. and if they are large, they fill the cavities with pus.
And no restorer says we must smooth the edges in burr, and each one dies every day. It seems only then, but they must be made in the form of uff's flour and powdered milled; then leave the dressing, as long as the bone is firm, and the cartilage is hardened.
And no time should you cut or pull out the wings of the goose from the wounds, and if the skin is hanging loosely, and holds tightly, and blows the salves among; For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the hot iron comes to the skin while you are working, if it touches a piece of wool or silk that is slightly oily or in a pouch of alcohol.
And if the abscess does not come out, apply plaster made of flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on light sponges, and do not tie it too tightly.
And if the wound is small and it is torn into fine pieces, if the extraction is done with suitable tools, then cut the skin, and the cure of things enchanting charms, and soothing, if like plasters and ointments are suitable for this;
If there is no wound and the patient is healthy, if the cure of tentacles occurs and he puts in pins, as long as it is healthy.
When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not deep, but only slightly so, and it is not broken into pieces, but rather bent slightly, like a bow. If it is noticed, it can be gently treated.
It is necessary to note that if the fracture is on the left side, you should cut your finger in the mouth of the helper. And if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, cut your finger on the right hand, and lightly cut the fracture, and do it with the other hand in reverse, and hold steady.
And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described in two parts, then it comes that you administer extension of two parts, as long as it is equal.
And if the teeth move or fracture, if they are pulled from a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put it on the broken mandible, and put on two folds. And place under the louse a well-made iron nail, or a piece of leather similar, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it to the mouth you choose, and instruct the patient to lie down, and give him light food.
If you see that the figure changes, if it moves too much, and then return to the point where it was originally; and apply plaster with flour from the grinding mill, or sisal thread, after you have set the lice;
and apply the plaster on the inside of the lice, and when it is dry, press it onto the skin, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it remains healthy; The patient's condition improves after three weeks.
And if the abscess bursts, if we have not said this many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound in the same bone, it is repaired with a small piece of bone. If the bone has thin and flexible parts in this area.
If the wound is large, then enlarge it according to your need.
When you have all these pieces, and there is no lack of pain, if the wound is wide, and it is large, and put on flexible dressings at this point, to ensure health until it is cured.
The break occurs more often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is repaired in three ways.
Or, it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore.
Or, there is a fracture with a wound.
And the dressing should be changed as soon as the wound is sore, if you have two assistants, so that one can hold the injured part while the other changes the dressing. and he extends the other arm towards the part.
then place the incision at your two fingers, if it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or movement.
And if you have to extend further, if you place the elbow of the patient against a round object such as a spoon or a ring, and it is large according to your need. and stretch and lighten the force, and hold the sphere at your hand, if you place the incision exactly as it should be.
1. If you do not treat the head of the strong force, because it comes in front, then the patient's strength will increase, and they should take care of their shoulder or ear, and hold the muscles of the shoulder, until the bone of the strong force is raised.
Then direct the incision to your two fingers, and if you break the bone, it should be cut off. If you manage to do this, you will succeed.
And then cut through the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, if it is one of the incisions you have. But make sure to use enough force with this instrument to ensure its effectiveness.
And it seems like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the hand.
And it has two ends, as you see, and the larger ones should be wider than the others, as the fracture of the wound you made when you treated the bone.
When you are sure of the incision point, if the wound is small, and if you doubt the incision point, if you use the wound of linen and tapestry, according to its quantity.
2. And if apostemy is large, it comes, if you have a lot of cloth in oil and wool and wine, and put it on.
The stripping of the bone, when it is sensitive to pain and to the tailor's cut, is that you place on the bone the pulverized powder of millstone and oakum of mackerel, and light sponges on top, and a small dot of glue at the seam, if you can; Then take a very thick band of a palm leaf, then put on a double fold of cloth, and apply it; Then take a small needle of III degrees wide and long, and wrap it around the bend, so that the head of the bend remains stable. And put the needle on the bracelet, turn the bend over the shoulder, and unloose the healthy arm, and unloose the injured arm. And tighten each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bracelet firmly, and you see clearly that the needle does not move on the broken bone, then reward each one, and when you untie it, if the restraint is loose.
1. and make the patient lie down on his back, and he puts when he falls in little oil on the wound to lift the assistant up high. 2. if I align the fracture by the alignment of the shoulder, or you lay the arm at the collarbone, and it does not slip out of place accidentally, it holds for about 20 years.
3. then continue the cauterization, if you see that it has merit, and hold and let go as soon as it is restored.
4. and it is restored in 28 years at most, and without any harm to men.
Of the injury to the shoulder
A sudden injury occurs when the shoulder breaks or becomes too wide due to the bone not being in its proper position, and it does not heal on its own, only through touching.
If the limb appears to match the shape of the fracture, and it is reshaped according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
Then put powdered sulfur on the limb with a lot of heat, and light, and then make a double fold; Then put a large and thin plate on the limb, a little wider than the shoulder, and if it is not evenly placed, use a plate made of flax threads to adjust it perfectly;
Then the patient is held tightly in one firm bond, so that the joint does not move from its place, and watches each hour.
Whenever it is mobilized, if the patient holds it, and places the joint in its place, and sees the physician on his chest;
And the muscle is restored in XX hours or XXV.
When these numbers are completed, if the patient leaves, and is sure, because it is only lightly heavy that is set;
When a piece of bone sticks out, and there is no flesh to cover it, if it is left untreated, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of easing abscess pain.
of the fracture of the piece
The weight is never broken in the environment, but this comes rarely; But it often breaks in the joint.
And when it is broken in the bone, if it is not adjusted correctly, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of nourishment, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it feels well.
And the restoration if it is that the patient's arm breaks at his shoulder, and he inserts a gusset between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two costals in your hands, and subtly puts them equal to all the ways you can, as long as the bone looks like it should;
Then put on bandages and threads of salt or another light substance, and wrap it around the subtle edge of the bone, or another light substance, and tie it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the line around back, and pull it with force, and reward each hour the hair, and if it becomes loose, then the pull.
and if it becomes loose, either due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, if you haste, and loosen, and rinse the wound, and address whatever came from methods of treatment.
then reset the wound, and pull as long as it is safe.
Of the breast wound
Scars that the fracture of the ribs only comes when they are large after the back, and at the head of dens, and do not bend unless it is because they are greasy. And the sentence feels well in the inquiry, I must.
And the restorations are such that if you put the wound evenly, as it should be. And then put the plaster, and draw it tightly with an arrow, if you have the skill.
And if the costal fracture is inclined towards the dens, it feels very painful and tense, like tears, because it does not have flesh. And it is full of points, and all is vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have put much faith in it.
And if those who say it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the belly, to fast the breast.
We do not do this, that apostes does not come, if it has not come. And if it comes, then the safe one.
And none of them say that they put winding tubes in the limb, because they are made of sugar, and it seems reasonable. Indeed, there is doubt that the winding tube does not draw out the superfluities from the limb because of its weak position.
And none of them say that you should cover the shoulder with fine oiled cloth, and then put tents between the ribs to measure the limb accurately, then treat pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
When the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone that presses on the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut off part of the costal cartilage, and it is necessary to put an instrument to ward off the face.
And therefore it is necessary to cut into the bone, and remove it lightly, and then cut the edges of the wound if they are large, and dress them with plasters as soon as possible.
And if abscesses come, then put on oiled cloths, and on the wound.
While the patient is in this position, treat the affected limb according to the rules of apothecary, and make sure the ribs are not broken on the cost.
And to the spine of the back.
And when it happens to none, and you see if it will be safe or not, if you see the hands mollified and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, if it does not hurt.
Dangerous that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they are held and do not hurt when they are stretched, dangerous that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put it in care.
And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of the bones, and if the accidents are in hands, and on the back there is a sudden fall and a ventile with voluntary excretion;
When one has cut at their belly and it feels like a desire to evacuate. And when it is fed on its back and it sees it asleep, if it cannot. Mortal wounds: If they do not labor in their cure.
And if that accident does not come, then it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that if it has an abscess, if you put on olive oil or wool grease, until it is calmed;
Then put on a comfortable plaster and let it dry, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, as long as you are healthy.
If any bones break, then cover them with a cloth. If the bone is large, then sew the two sides of the wound together as tightly as possible, then apply a poultice of uncooked animal fat to keep it clean and healthy.
If the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone," take your left hand's purse and place it on the other hand's thumb, then place the splint and tape over it, if you are able.
Then hold it in place, and if it is broken, then cut it off, and the bone, and treat the wound as much as possible to keep it clean and healthy.
Of the fracture of the hip bone
When the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, unless there was some previous injury to the head. And it becomes very long, and descends into the jaw, and there comes pain in the head, and tenderness, and swelling of the part that is broken.
And the restoration, if you extend your hand as far as the fracture site; and trace the fracture and its position.
And if the fracture is at the head only, then set it as straight as possible, so that it is in natural position.
And if the fracture is long or slopes towards the jaw, then raise the patient on his stomach as much as possible for the reduction of this fracture to be successful. When you have placed it evenly, then place the ruler on it, and then place a piece of flax or twine, and tighten the knot, if it does not move.
and use the shoulder blade as much as the color is even. And order the patient to sleep either on their back or on their side.
And if abscess forms, and comes, if it does not hurt, then as long as the abscess does not hurt, and place what we have already said. and then return to restoration, and tighten if it is necessary, if there are no other accidents.
The first sentence to translate is "de la brisure de l’ajutoire". The translation of this phrase
The assistant is that which is between the shoulder bone and the shoulder blade of the arm, and if it is broken, then it should be repaired according to one of the following two methods:
The other method is to use a piece of clean cloth, according to this form:
And tie the two ends together, and pull them up, and place the blade under the stitch.
Then place the sleeve over the broken arm, until it reaches the wrist, and make a loop with the sleeve, then it can hold any heavy thing or extend the sleeve around it.
Then put the forceps evenly in your hands, as long as the forceps return to its place as intended.
If the patient is unable to hold the dislocated head in place, the surgeon should lift the patient's arm and place their hand on the patient's collarbone. The surgeon should then instruct the patient to touch the mark made by the surgeon's hand at their own fingers, and also touch other marks on different parts of the body. The patient should extend each limb to its full length.
And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then break the lock and extend each of the parts.
And if the forceps are tilted towards the shoulder blade, then you should tie one end of the string to the shoulder blade and the other end to the opposite side, so that the forceps do not slip.
And if the forceps are tilted towards the elbow, then you should lightly tie one end of the string to the elbow and the other end to the opposite side, so that the forceps do not slip, while ensuring that the forceps are even with the shoulder blade and the elbow.
Then place the forceps evenly as intended, and tighten it, hold your breath so that nothing happens.
And if the abscess is pricked, if it does not stop within seven days, and you put on it fine sand and rose oil, as long as the abscess is pricked, it will be eased.
Then extract it, and the manner of extracting it if you put the splint on the wound, then assemble the arm with the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
And tie the bandage, and extract it with the aid, and from the arm, if the arm is in the elbow, nothing will stop you, or if the shoulder is not moved.
If you doubt that the bone does not move, use these, and place the cut with a wider and stronger needle than the others, and have between each cut one space of two spaces, and each space should be as large as it passes the break three times of each part.
Then tighten the needles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving away.
If you see the setting of the needles and the stretching, as we have said, in the place where you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the healing, if it is left to itself for nine days, as we have said.
Then look at each third day the link, that itch does not swell or it does not come to the limb because the gouty arthritis is too inflamed. If the address, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then only slip if after three days or more, and lie on the patient's back, and have his hands on his stomach.
and put the helper I cussin plain linen, and look every hour during or after the nourishment, that the limb broken does not move or is not softened the joints.
If the remedy is by the power of medicine, and we then cut into the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is divided into equal parts. And when it comes to taking back, if it is large.
It is customary that the helper and the leg are returned in XL years, all at once. And therefore, it must be desired and administered to the patient with warm baths and ointments for the limb to heal.
And if the tightening is thin and entangled, it should be slowly and gradually loosened for 1 to 2 months.
of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "funicle," and some are smaller, and it is these that form the pouch.
and the other is large, and it is the one that is dislocated, towards the small joint.
by chance only the large bone is broken, or the small one, and by chance they are assembled together.
When the small bones are broken, the repairs are lighter, and the cures;
and when the large bones are broken, it is a poor cure, and more painful than when they are broken together.
If only the small bones are broken, it will be sufficient to stretch lightly and put them even.
And if it is the large bone, then the treatment must be strained more forcefully.
and it is extended over the inner side of the hand, and the palm of the hand is raised higher than the others, and the small bones are placed lower than the others, and the patient should be supported by the physician himself, and the thumb should be raised higher than the others, so that the patient suffers no pain.
Then extend the shoulder muscles of the arm to the opposite side, either towards the thumb or towards the elbow, and some other muscles in the opposite direction.
And then he puts the head in place, according to his best form.
And if it is in pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no deviations that point to the cause, and you cannot restore it in its place, then follow our advice and the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the force of the wound, I have spoken to the single physician; if they take care.
And if in the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, and they are treated with ointments made of rose oil and wax, which are neither too hard nor too soft, nor too greasy; and they are applied gently, until the abscesses are relieved.
And then the bone, and he puts the powder of the fine mill with a lot of urine, then the seeds, and it is the seed of the brisket that is more forward, and a little wider than the others.
and he says that it must have VI branches or arms in different positions: whether it is in one of the bones, or in II:
and it is drawn up more above the brisket than other parts, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter: and be the belts that are above the wet and moist brisket, and not be too hard or rough:
and be the belts that are above the wet and moist brisket, and not be too hard or rough: And let the child, whose parents are absent, of the lineage, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
And reward the member and the limb after some years. And if any one happens to have an accident come to the member, if prickling comes to the member, if you should cool the member with warm water as much as possible, until the prickling is calmed.
and let the member rest without moving.
And then the stripping resumes, and if the limb is softened and the bones are loosened, and it seems like something, then it will be loosened.
And if the nails come to the member, because it is too tight, then you must soften it in a short time, and let some years pass, until the nails grow, and then strip it.
And if these things do not come to the patient when we have said them, within twenty years.
Or if the patient is in pain, then he can put his hands on his chest, and his chest should be even, and with little movement and relaxation, he falls asleep on his back.
And it is restored in XXX years or XXXV, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the hand fracture
It is hoped that on the back of the hand and at both wrists there are few fractures, and only sprains many times.
When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient manages to hold it steady, and holds it firmly in front of them,
then they extend their hand over the extended toe, and extend the broken bones, and place them evenly in the joints, as long as they are well connected.
and apply the plaster and bandages, if necessary, then put on a splint according to the size of the limb. and is wrapped in one fold of linen.
And if the fracture is at the heel of the foot, then make a ball of bandages, and instruct the patient to pull the bandage over the broken heel. And then the strain of a long, flaccid member, and it is the size of the hand, and it is strained, as it should be.
If the fracture is at the bone, then it comes that you place a splint on it, and another one on the foot, if the hand is over and right, then the line goes through the hand, and it is tightened between the two.
And if the fracture comes to none of us on both sides, and they are locked, then it should be placed evenly, as it should be. And it is strained with the palm, and if you see that a straight small nail is placed to lift the fracture, and does not move.
And if the fracture is in others, and as in the index or one of the others, if it is placed evenly, and it is held with the healthy finger that follows. If you tie them all together with what you have, or if you put them on a sling, as much as you can.
And take care in the restoration and positioning of the dislocation, and cut what comes, as I have said.
The bones of the elbow are often broken many times, and it is clear when it turns in front and behind.
And the restoration if it is tied with the lines of the fracture, and the other is not. And the patient lies on their face, then extend each member of its ligament to its equal part.
And it happens when the fracture is set in the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the joint, then some of the bones are pulled in one direction and the others in another, causing the break to be uneven.
And if it comes to the joint of the knee, then loosen the ligaments of the knee and extend the leg.
Then place the bone even with your two hands, according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and the bandage, and if it does not move, it is correct.
And if it moves slightly, then let it rest and return to your work and your care. The bandage is made in parts.
It is necessary that you wrap it around the fracture, doubling it in two or three layers, and removing the excess, then bend the leg until the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put one long thread between the kneecap and the leg, loosening the knee joint, and the end of the thread goes to the ankle;
Then turn the leg and the knee of the bend, then put the splint on, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
Then use the fifth finger between the leg and the knee of the cloth to evenly stretch the strap, then start to tie the form III or IV on the splint. And as you go further on the splint, less is tied.
Then take the two strings that you have tied between the leg and the knee, and the third splint that is attached, then go back to the other end of the file at the head of the string, as long as you can see the piebald.
When the limb is strained, if it does not move from its joint, then it is left alone, and there is no signs of inflammation or swelling. And if it comes, if it does not return, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times.
And if it has pieces of the bone that pricks, then it can be treated; and it can be. And if it cannot be treated, then it is necessary to cut the limb, and drain it. And the treatment is as we have said, whether it is healthy or not.
And never has the joint been broken in, if it is not put in its place, as we have said in the shoulder and arm.
The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
He advises that the elbow is restored in L years, or less than less, according to the differences of complexions.
It is said that in the right knee joint there is little fracture, but it wheezes many times.
And if it breaks, if not but a bruise, or a puncture, and comes to all wounds, and feels pain, and that is well.
And the restoration is placed if one makes equal those that are lost to their other side, as long as they are assembled in their place.
Then place the template, and insert a rounded staple, if you are skilled at it, and tighten it as it should be, then reward all the adjustments we have mentioned in other fractures, such as dislocation and other similar cases. If you place at each accident what it should be, as long as it is safe.
Of the break of the leg
That in the leg there are two bones, because some are called by right not "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile".
When a fracture occurs at the elbow, and it is treated in the same way as a properly set arm, and all the parts are restored. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg of all parts.
And if the fine bones are broken, then turn forward.
And if the large bones are broken, and it feels great pain, and one can see well. then turn around.
After the extension, put it in place, and hold it evenly.
But if it is not, it is necessary that the fracture be straight, and if there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter. and the other according to your virtue.
When you have completed your work, if you take two pieces of braided hair that point in opposite directions and are long enough to reach from the thigh to the knee, then...
then wrap them around the leg from the thigh to the knee, and tie it off there, and at this point do not allow the leg to lean to the right or left, and it will be well.
and no one maintains the length of the hair on the leg, and it is made of wool, and it is placed on the leg to prevent movement, and this is done properly in the break or wound.
and move each leg to see if it has an abscess or any other accident. if the cure is done when it is healthy.
Of the fracture of the bones of the hand
At the ankle, there is never a fracture, but the bones of the hand come to no fracture and must be careful, and only twisted in more positions.
And if there are many bones broken, and you see them breaking over each other, then set them as straight as possible, as if they were on the ground, just like when they were flying, and then place your foot on the leg, and lift the bones as much as they can stand in their places;
then apply the bandage and stitch, and then make a small tableau at the bottom of the limb, then draw it up to the knee, then when you have wrapped it around, then wrap drapes around the rest of the body, and other things that you know how to do;
And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not straightened, you will find the bones uneven, broken, dislocated.
If there are no broken bones, if they are repaired, then as we have said, it should be done with the hand. Then, place the other bone in the stele according to the length of the other, and make a larger pocket, then put the point that I mentioned in, and stretch it accordingly.
And if there are two or more broken bones, if you place one on each with a stele according to its quantity, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and stretch the point, it will be fine. And if it is placed on the top of the point with the stomach of the point, then it will be well etched.
It is necessary that you do not neglect the other things I have said for other breaks, as we have said. And cut out every accident as it comes.
The following sentence should be translated into English: "of the fracture of the bone
When the woman's nature is broken, if it is made larger, then it leans towards the painful side, and should be held by the side.
Then fill the knee of the patient's nature with wool, and put as much as I have.
Then lay the woman down, and gently raise her shoulders, and then jump the wool, as it comes to the entrance of the nature, and return the knee with the cloth.
When she sees the wound, if it is bone, and when she has cleaned it, she puts on the dressing, and in seven days or more, it will heal. If the fracture is healed, and if you see it, take a bowl of bloodroot, and attach a cord to the wound, and pour all the blood into the bowl in nature. Then blow into the cord until the bowl is full of blood. Nature will heal the fracture.
Then it will be filled with cotton, and left alone for no more than seven days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the arm is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the elbow.
And these breaks are not well known to those who study and use it, and they do not read my book.
For the break means in more ways the right way of restoration: understand the doubts.
In the jaw, when it is broken, take an owl's gape and bite the jaw; Then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for three days or until it is healthy again.
Of fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the arm or shoulder, or seeming, that he be healthy now, if that the wounds we have said testify.
And if the wound is healthy, if the vitrolle burns, if you have nothing else, then resume restoring the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not come.
And if the patient does not come the next day, leave the restoration until the following day, as long as the patient is calmed, and do not touch him again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause the patient to come with evil accident.
If the bone is broken, it should be set in place as soon as possible, if you can manage to do so gently with your hands, at a slight extension.
And if the extensions are not apparent to put them evenly on your hands, if the rammer has this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound. and because it is necessary to press three or four times, according to how many there are in each treatment of the splint.
and it should be sharp and of medium size, so that it does not tear at the compression on your limb, and it should also be ahead, and large in front, like this:
And is called the "palisade", because it should have the heads of the screws placed on the end of the bone. And the bone once again, as much as it rises, and make them equal on both sides. And if the fracture is slight, and the fragments cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the head of the bone with the bandage, as much as the fragments have power.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, if it manages to pass through an appropriate instrument, either a cautery or an incision or a more suitable one, for your own good.
Then use this which is made of sharpness and small scratches.
When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, seek help immediately, as it may not be in its natural state.
If you make it so that it is in its place, then wrap it with a strip of black, warm ointment, and properly so. and do not put anything else on the wound, such as oil, so that it does not come to be sore and corrupt.
Then administer the ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it with a cloth entirely, according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound is not tightened with the fracture.
And many times it has caused the patient's leg to be paralyzed, and they have brought in the physician or died or were corroded never. And the scars are softer and more supple than the others.
And if the wound is large or great, and you doubt that you have had accidents but did not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the leg, if it does not happen that you put ointments on it. But envelops around, on the side of the elbow, hard wrappings, and they tie.
When you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, and if all that you have placed on it has come out, and you put on a salve to heal wounds, which is a common and similar ointment.
It is necessary that you unbandage the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is not swollen and healthy.
It is necessary that the member be straightened in a partly manner that the belly can be moved lightly.
If they continue to twist, and it cannot be held together but moves away from the belly, with small pieces of bones, because it is necessary that you close the wound with a tent, and all these broken parts cause that this pain comes.
And if a fistula comes to the shoulder, or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is written in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken, and it is opened at the joint, as with the bone of the elbow or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if it is not treated, because many times death comes, but it is left open until it bleeds;
by chance a wound may be found on it after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it;
Many times after the healing of the fracture, we come when it is near to the joint, and it is a matter to see the appearance of the limb; And by chance, it cannot make the limbs its natural position.
If we find that it is fresh: If it is treated with styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcolla, acacia, and similar ones, if you do not use any of these, or all together, and mix them with spikenard or with a large amount of beer or with asafetida; and apply them to the wound, and extract it well, and do not let it drip in your hands;
and apply them to the wound, and extract it well, and do not let it drip in your hands; and then let it drip, and continue with another one until the swelling is reduced;
If you strain too hard on a well-made piece of cloth. For if the fabric does not hold up, it will tear all the threads from the limbs.
And if the blister is converted into hardness as a piercing, and it becomes sore to the touch, if the covering is removed, and the excess is revealed; Or you do not shave it as soon as it is healed, until it is healthy, and the care as soon as it is healthy.
A weak limb that is weak after a cast
When the bone fracture is restored, and the swelling disappears after weak and subtle limbs, if it comes from various causes. If one of the bones is because it was cut too tightly, and it did not fit as expected. Or because there were too many stitches, and the nerves could not come to the member. Or due to the multitude of stitching. Or because there were too many large movements, and it did not fit at its time. Or because there is little blood in the body, which makes them weak.
And if the treatment is that you make the patient lie down, and make the chest tense as much as possible without multiplying in it. and administer baths, and then he becomes joyful and calm.
Then apply poultice to the member, if it attracts the great swelling, and the redness often comes from the red tede, until the swelling reaches the member. and returns to its natural shape.
A dislocated limb after injury When the limbs are twisted after resetting, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the affected member is deformed, it does not fit its natural shape.
if one does not believe the folk who say that one must break the member completely at once, and most have done this in our land.
and these operations are blamed, and great harm comes of it, and often death occurs.
The first line of the text translates to: "All wounds, if they are nodulations and tortures, are fresh, if they are raised with hot water, or herbs that soften, if like soles of feet, and roots, and honey-locust trees, and similar things.
The second line of the text translates to: "And I apply a mollifying substance if it is well made, as dysentery is, and take the sole of the foot, and cook with fat or linseed oil, and apply on top.
The third line of the text translates to: "Or you take fat figs, and crush them with colon fat, and similar medicines that moisten the dysentery.
And no time is there where the noose is tightened continuously and for a long time with wet hands. And allow movement to the limb at each hour.
When the tortuosity is aroused and becomes painful, like a piercing, and there is a need for the ointment at the forge, if it comes to touch the bone, under the subtle incision lightly. and put on linen and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs at no joint, if it comes now to return sensation to the limb.
For if we are delayed, if it becomes swollen, and by chance if it is reset at the shoulder.
because it does not matter how we move it at the ear when it is swollen. Many times brought to vomit and other pains.
Indeed, when this happens, if I make the patient well, then let it go, as long as the abscess is not healed.
Then, the patient's inflamed and oily limb was raised, then gently reset, and each member was treated as if the treatment came from their own legs.
I have ordered the cauteries for the dislocations of the shoulder bones.
Recently, it has been found that the mandibles are often dislocated, and there are two ways to reset them: either they are a small piece of their bones, and are softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and cut the saliva from the mouth that cannot be held, and cannot close the mouth, and wrap the tongue with speech;
If the dislocation is small, it returns through the more common positions.
And if it is completely achieved and accomplished, then you must gently reset it, and do not touch it.
And in such a way that the minister burns the child's head of the patient, and pierces the tip of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which causes the mouth to close, if it is dislocated by II parts. And the other two hands are deformed to make them equal.
And instruct the patient to smooth out his mandibles and move them all parts. And the patient should be held steady until it is in its proper place.
And if it is reset, it should be greased, just like the two mandibles together, with hot oil and ointment, until it is reset lightly.
There is no need to translate this line as it seems to be a command or instruction rather than a medical term. It could be translated as "Do not try to bring it back, as we have said." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.
When the hairs are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if you put soft flannels moistened with oil of roses and wax on it, then gently bind the hair with threads or strings.
When the patient falls asleep on his back, and his head is between two pillows, if he does not move to the right or left, and does not strain himself, but prays with light food, as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws.
Then he swallows what he sees lightly, and does not strain himself to open his mouth for eating and drinking, as long as the jaw is well steadied and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be set at once in an hour and are not converted to their proper positions, then if fevers and customary coldness come on, and by chance stomach pain and vomiting of clear bile arrive.
And when you see this, you will know that it is a disaster. And many times he died, in nine years.
The force cannot be removed from the cost of continuing the arm and the hip, and it is never fixed at the deflation, and it is felt as such.
And if the patient has a dislocation, it is when the shoulder pains on its side, and extends its arms. Then press the shoulder with your hand, and it will return.
Then place the cautery and the burn on the skin, and pull it off.
And the head that is towards the chest cannot be dislocated. If it does not happen, and if it does not dislocate ever, then reset the shoulder at its place, as we have said.
Then place the cautery and the burn on the skin, and pull it off, and instruct the patient to rest as long as they are healthy.
And then, bring the shoulder head back to its place when it is out of its socket.
Of the shoulder dislocation
There are three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated:
If one part of the shoulder is dislocated, it is due to the muscle being pulled away from the bone. And the second way is in the muscle area that is closest to the bone. And by chance, it can also be dislocated at the other end, but this happens rarely.
And it does not get dislocated from the shoulder muscle or nerve.
And more often than not, it gets dislocated towards the shoulder blade, especially for those who have poor posture, because they jump higher.
For those who have enough fat, they jump and prick themselves with points, and then return to their points.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or crushed, and the muscle of their spine is torn out by an abscess, and ensure that it is not dislocated by this.
It is therefore necessary that you stretch it, as long as you are sure of it. and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when they are pulled towards the shoulder, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and from there to the shoulder, as it is in some cases, and so it is with others. and cannot bring his hand to his face, and does not move at all.
and also, if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden because you can see the scar.
and this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or if the child is young.
And the method is to gently hold the hand of the young patient high, then place your fingers on the knee, and gently pull up on the joint. And he gently holds the hand, extends it upwards, and places it aside. If a sudden cold comes.
And if it does not come as we have said in our hands just afterward, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. and the patient should be given a warm, soothing and softening remedy, such as a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and it should be given.
Then the patient should be relieved of the pain on his back, and put a wet bandage on the ankle, not too soft or too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the bandage, and gently lift the shoulder of the upper arm, and move the hand of the patient.
and some other signs indicate that the patient's shoulder is dislocating, if it does not move freely. That shoulder is back now, and if you see that the dislocation is reset in this way:
and it is that you make sure to present the home that is greater than the shoulder; and it is that the breast is turned towards the chest, and the shoulder is pulled away from the body of the patient, and the body is lifted up, so that the shoulder hangs freely; and some other signs indicate that the patient's hand is being turned towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too heavy, then with them there is nothing heavy that can be done, and the dislocation returns now.
And the resetting is done in another way as well:
and it is made by measuring a long thread on the ground, and the head of the shoulder is also reset as if it were a pin, and it should not be too thick or too rough. Then it is placed on the patient's shoulder, but if it has been twisted too much, and the shoulder is too long or too thick, it should be adjusted accordingly.
Then it is extended on the other hand, and the joint returns to its proper place.
If it does not return to its proper place after these things we have said, then this treatment is not effective. 1. Take a strip of two arms of great and four of wide size, which can enter the joint through the front of the bone, according to this form:
2. Then wrap the strip around the head of the bone, making sure it is not too tight, so as not to harm the patient, and then place it on the affected joint;
3. Extend the arm on the long side of the bone, and place the assistant on the head of the arm, and the other arm at the wrist, then extend the hands and leave the chest hanging from the other side: The joint now reveals itself.
If the joint is realigned in this manner, if it comes to pass that you place a ball of thread equal to the size of the arm on one side, then place a powdered spice spray on the other side, with incense and vinegar, all along the shoulder blade and down the back, then tighten the thread on one side, turn the limb over the spray, and wrap the hand around the arm, and let the hand remain in this position.
And it is necessary that he be treated quickly, as the member will recover faster if it is comfortable.
and then treat again after 4 or 7 days, and move it. And if it is tight and not softened, it will be cured.
And if the joint is stiff due to moisture that came, or for another reason, it comes that you apply cauterizations at III incisions, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauterizations.
And if you do everything correctly, and after 7 days it does not hold, and the joint does not rise with the arm raised forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened. And suspects that the joint will never return to its place in its socket.
The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by force, and extension of hands, and it is treated at another time.
and treat until it is healthy.
And after the cure comes pain in the member, and then with movement, if it is used with hot water many times, until that pain is alleviated, and return to its original state.
of the dear dislocation
Shoulder joints that are stiff and dislocate again and again.
And it has become loose in all directions, and even forward and backward, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it can be seen and felt well. And it becomes loose according to each figure. And when you join the sharp edge with the clean part, if you see it open widely. For the joint is fine, and cannot brush the arm, nor reach the shoulder with anything.
And it is necessary to reset it always when the arrowhead comes out, because if the arrowhead comes out, it would be painful to pull it back.
And by chance it cannot be brought back intact at all, in fact when it is below; If it is worse than the others, and it is more painful, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration if it is, when it is so that you can bring it back, extend your hand to your two hands. And the arms are expanded, and the hands are moved according to the cost, down and up, and bend the joint at its assembly or at the root of the palm, as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is forward, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then apply strong extension.
And when two ministers extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move at extension.
Then turn the arm in each direction, then have a long and wide double cloth.
And when you look at the joint of the joint in your hand, if there is no oil to smooth the joint, then form the joint as it regenerates.
And when it is in the joint, if you put it with a dry cloth with ointment, and form the joint, and can hold the arm at the wrist of the surgeon, and leave some fingers, then remove it.
And if the joint is tight in its place, if it is loose, and leaves it.
And if you see that the joint does not tighten well, if you resume the application and the linen, and leave it for some time, until it is firmly fixed. Then let it be.
And if he feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it is still, if it is bathed and rubbed gently, and pressed as much as it is calmed. Or if you put on the joint a layer of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for an hour and a night, then the bone, and let the linen enter a bath. And when it hurts, he should rub the joint firmly, then put the nail back on, and then apply a poultice. And repeat this two or three times until it is healed.
And if you see, if he puts on a wet wool cloth and warms it with a poker, and stretches it out.
if it goes back to its original position.
The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de fe
The joint of the hand becomes loose, and the return is lighter than the other joints. Indeed, it is necessary to return the hand to its place as soon as possible, while it is loose, unless the wound is swollen or there is an abscess.
When you want to place the forced hand on a table, extend the fingers, and then put your thumb in place, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pull it as it reforms.
Indeed, it is necessary to watch if it is well with him. Then put the forced hand on the table at extension and at the end. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the maimed hand on the table with your hand, and measure if you can put your hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is well. If not, if the strain of the plaster does not appease the pain, and it leaves in this sense to resume.
If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the dislocated joint back in its place after some time, then the joint will become permanently dislocated.
And the patient does not know that as long as the hand is inflamed, and cannot hold anything at all. Therefore, the nerves are cut, or the artery.
If there is no other option than to hold by fire cauterization, and by chance there is nothing else.
And when the hands are on the wound, if you apply the instrument we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for some time, then remove it and leave it alone.
If it cannot be moved well, and there is no pain, if the hot iron, and the rubbing as much as it is healthy.
of the dislocation of both hands
Never has the hand of the patient been loosened at any part, never at the back of the palm or abdomen.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, first reset the dislocation by holding the shoulder joint in place, and then move it back to its original position.
Then leave it alone for a few days, and then set it again in the same way.
And if you follow our advice, the shoulder will heal in a few days, and the joint will move freely, and then reconnect it.
And do this often until it is healed, and if it dislocates again, and if it moves in the palm of your hand, and do as you have done before until it is healthy.
And so I do, when it is dislocated from another side.
The first sentence to translate is "dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos". The translation of this line is
When the shoulder of the man is dislocated, or the woman's elbow is dislocated, if there are more dislocations, it is because there has been no treatment, for the patient dies.
And the sign is that the dislocation is forced to jump and cannot hold it, and many times all the members are softened, or the knees or the right arm or the left.
And many times it stops at four parts.
That which stops at the buttocks is called "glibosis".
The treatment if it is that you reward if the glibosis has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or cure, but total sanation.
And that which comes from choking or drilling or similar things, the ancient ways of cures by great words, or it has no small profit.
But I shortened it according to my intention, and formed stitches in various ways.
I say that in the gallbladder disease that comes before, no one is healthy or well.
And also those that come directly in the second ribs, and cannot be cured except for the one that comes to the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient's shoulder is extended over his face in the first elbow and has some strain on him, which does not cause him to bend.
Then the bandage is made at the head of the neck, and the other is for the shoulder, and a line is tied around the shoulders of the patient, and the other is for the elbows, and the wrists, and the fingers.
and two ministers stretch the limbs, one at the head and the others at the toes, among the two tenses.
and be well closed, the tense as we have said, and the doctor places his hands on the spikes, as it revolves.
And if it does not revolve with this cure, then take a third arm of long wood, and carve out the hole, and the patient must be on the side, and cut the head of the tableau out of the hole, then put the mold of the tableau on the spike. and place the doctor's hands on the other head of the tableau, and press well, as it revolves in the joint.
If you see, if I do it at the turn that turns with the hand. And if you tie knots in the head of the helper's arm, and turn each knot to the other, and there should be a thumb's space between each knot, longwise.
And if there is a puncture in each knot, or the turn moves, and the knots are tightly held in the earth, so they do not move.
And between each knot, if there is a turn turning, and if the turns are loose, and there should be two turns for every petit knot, to turn the turn.
Then, tie the first ligament that is among the ties of the torso towards the head, and the other ligament towards the other torso, and each of the ministers sets their torso on all the ligament, and the masters place the awl equally as we have said.
When it is even, if you apply a desiccant with much urine, then cleanse, and then remove the stool, and then apply a tablet of III doses, which preserves the leukocytes and the healthy part of the spinal cord, then tie the ligament as we have said, using the needles of subtle norrisment, as long as it is healthy.
and if nothing comes to the end of health, if it is necessary to administer smoothing and dissolving medicines with the stethoscope that we have mentioned before. and never has a piece of plaster been applied, and never has there been an appearance at the back of the spine with a stiff neck, and make sure that this is not a dislocation. and it is the bone that has opened, because one should not have too much confidence in it. by chance, death might come.
Advice: The joints of the shoulder and the shoulder are only dislocations, and not like other joints.
And the joint of the elbow is dislocated according to four parts: by flesh and bone, and front and back.
and more flesh, and less dislocation in front and back.
And the knowledge of his dislocation is that when the injured leg is joint with the sound one, it is longer and more open, and the injured knee has more space than the sound one, and it cannot double its knee in fire. And it is the one that is deflected by the abscess of the chest, because the head of the shoulder comes out.
And the sign of him who comes to the burn, if this accident is against these fronts.
And the signs of that one who came in front, if it is well his leg according to the completion. 1. All ways, do not double the gentle sensation of pain, and if you see it happening, hold your urine, wipe your anus, and when you go, pass through the heel.
And the sign of him who comes to the rear is if he cannot expand his genital area, and does not double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is dislocated against the costal cartilages.
2. If the appearance of this dislocation is due to previous dislocations and it does not improve according to its position, if there is no treatment; 3. then it is only presumption that he has assumption.
4. And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, it will be bent and deformed, and the muscle will be stronger on the left and right sides; By chance, if it returns, and there is no other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply strong support and tighten the leg with two hands or with the limb that is closest to the groin. and some other supports extend your hand in a similar way that it blocks your hands from being loose, then it tightens around the limb that is closest to the groin. And some others tie the head of the limb with the limb.
And they extend it up and down once, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and hangs down.
This manner of extension is common, as seen in four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If this is not the case, then it is necessary to provide care for its appearance.
If the dislocation is at the jaw, then it is necessary to tie the bandage on the healthy side of the jaw, then place the knot at the root of the tongue, and the other end around the tongue that is turned outwards, then bring the knot towards the tongue and towards the forceps.
Then perform some other operations on your arms, and apply a bandage to the largest muscle of the dislocated jaw, and extend it along the formed edge. If it returns to its place now.
And this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
If you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have said, then it comes to pass that the patient's foot is drawn together by a strong ligament at the two ankles and at the two knees, and the affected leg is extended twice as much as the other.
Then it is hung suspended from the head of a nail, and it is held down by the two arms.
Then order the minister to bind the head of the girdle, and have other ministers suspended with the patient, who bind the girdle, because the joint now returns to its original position.
And when the dislocation is at its worst, if the patient feels pain, as we have said in the one who has difficulty, and straightens the limbs of the affected limb properly, and also the knee.
Then place two threads, one at the head and one at the other end, then secure the thread between the thighs of the affected limb in the proper form. and it has a plant of wet drapes to prevent it from drying out, so that the affected limb does not bleed, then extend each minister towards him, and he places the dislocation in his hand.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place it there, and press as we have said in the gilbositeit, and guide the patient to the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the affected limb quickly, and according to what I have said. And put your pain on the other side of the malefactor's hand, then press with the other hand, and stretch it towards the genital area.
And if the dislocation is in the groin, and it cannot be stretched out by the malefactor, then do not lift him up, but if he was dislocated in the groin like this before, as we have said about the two hams, then... And it should be on his face, and the stretch should be extended as we have said before, and he must press on the joint at the table. And it will be enough when the malefactor stretches his legs, and they will be even. Then reset the dislocation, and place the splint, and hold it with a bandage so that the pain does not move. And rest for three days or four, then remove the splint, and place the plaster.
If you see that they are equal, if it is tight, then leave it for three days.
Then remove the splint, and let the element go as soon as the limb is comfortable.
Of the shoulder's dislocation
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: It is known as trenching and deferring, and delaying.
And do not move forward.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not stay at the knee, it means it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient lie on their side, and extend the leg if possible, and put your buttocks on theirs, and put your feet on theirs.
Then take their knee with your hands, and move between your two, then bend the two knees that form it. And other assistants extend the foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it is well dislocated lightly.
and apply the plaster above, and make the leg straight at the knee, and assemble the toes as much as three or four times, then cut it off.
and do not work on the joint of the elbow, until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not present, then extend the treatment firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the wound, as long as it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is never twisted, and never completely dislocated, and it is difficult to mend.
And if the knee is swollen, and try before the part where it is dislocated.
If the limb is light, and it should be stretched gently with your hands only when it is weak.
And if it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the limb with one hand, and tighten the knee with the other.
Then draw the point on your right hand, and then on your left, twice, then pull it up, and hold it well at the top.
And do this twice, as we have said, by bending and drawing the point.
If it returns, that's good.
If not, then the work is repeated because it returns.
And if it cannot return, then I will make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly press his heels against the ground between his toes, and spread his legs wide so that the point does not pierce the skin.
Then, the minister traces the cup with their hand, and some other ministers extend their hands or arms to the collar of the shoulder. Then, all ministers extend their hands equally, and the pins are placed either inside or outside the joint of the patient to hold the patient in place while they are extended.
Then, the minister places the dislocation in their hands, and some other ministers trace the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation returns to its original position.
And when it is firm, if the plaster is applied and the stitches are removed, and the joint is formed, and the tendons that were under the ankle are tightened, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
Then it is left alone for 2 or 3 days, and if it becomes loose, it should be tightened.
Then it is tightened after the third or fourth day, and the patient should use the aid for 4 days. And if the patient advances as far as the end, it is only a matter of time before it dislocates again.
2. And if an abscess forms, it comes, and if you can calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, as soon as it is healthy.
The first line of the text is When the shoulders are dislocated, if they can be extended well with effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation occurs in no part of the shoulder, it is only a matter of time before it dislocates again. Then, place the aid on the shoulder at the same level as the joint or above it, and press on the parts that open these joints, until it realigns.
When the hair is long and even, and it does not prick, if one makes a cut in the flesh at the base of the hair, then the wound forms and is left for three days, then it heals. and it rests, as long as it is healthy.
Of wounds and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and slow, do not be hardhearted.
And begin with calming remedies for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb at the joint, even if the abscess is still present.
And when the limb is at the joint, if you can calm the abscess and treat the wound, according to what is necessary, use drying herbs.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture, and the bones are broken, then the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And keep away from the path of despair, according to what I have said, for it is good for you according to your creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and your heart.
