You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine, the fulfillment of it, and made the end through its exposures and by its declarations. And it came to my vision that I have fulfilled this book with this surgery, which is part of the work of hands, it is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is rejected in every way, if it is perceived by science and knowledge, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in books that the hands have moved. And this has led to the error and vanities, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
I seem that I could revive it by assembling the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation. and I will come together the forms of firebrands of cauterization and other tools of the work with the assembly of the declaration and preparation of it, as he is skilled.
And because no one of the hands masters is found in our hands, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for him who enters the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and to have knowledge of the bones, the nerves, the muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the limbs, and the issue of the same.
And because Ypocras says that with the non it is not made, and with the work it is few. and likewise in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that who is not acquainted with things before said, if he will make it without error and not deceive the men.
I have many times wanted to write about these who come into this science and if they abandon this science and sense experiment.
I see a madman who cuts off the scrotum of a woman and cuts the collateral arteries of her neck. because so much blood flows out that the woman dies in her hands.
And I see another madman who treats a piercing of an old man and the piercing was large. if he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and he died the enemy in three years.
I had not yet been called to treat this wound, and I saw the position of the patient and the size of the wound, and if it was not cut well, he died.
And I see another madman who cured the duke of our land who had a broken leg and with the fracture there was pain.
And the patient's ignorance tightens the wound on the wound as it has been done by a strong time, and does not leave any pain in the wound, and leaves it in its final state.
and he commands that it should not be loosened.
and waited until the leg was all swollen and the foot came to destruction.
I am called upon to come to him, and I hurried to free the leg. and when I loosened it, it was in pain but did not feel any pain.
But all the paths of his corruption were already confirmed or member, and it could not be cured.
And the corruption spreads to the arm as long as the limb is completely wasted.
And see another reason why it will fall and be enchanted, and then burned by the malice of his lordship.
For chancre, when it is free of melancholic matter, only one thing can be done if it is not in its entirety the part that can be completely cured of what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: it is to know whether it is safe or if there is more risk in other positions.
and I will show in each case of this book where there is fear and danger.
And it is important that you keep this in mind, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in hand, and your physicians lightly but firmly, and use the best method if by God's grace you come to health and be strong.
Et leave the terrible diseases of grief in health.
And put your weapons aside because of what you doubt, and be sure in yourself that you can come from this world to the other with glory.
Galen's advice is given in no uncertain terms. Do not take medicine for illness without first consulting a wise physician.
I have heard this treatise is discussed in three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and medical cauterization, and this is the ordered chapter for the physician up to the point.
and of the forms of stitches, and of the forceps for cauterization, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and perforating, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
and order the chapters and the forms of the stitches.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things.
and it is ordered of the loosening of the joints and the forms of stitches.
However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and no less for each complexity.
I say that the quality of aid, and not harm, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and the secret remedy.
And many spoke of the arrows, and they agreed to this.
And they speak a little of their words, for I question their age.
I say that burning helps universally with all complexions or matter, however, the complexion: It is to know that hot complexion has matter, and dry complexion has matter.
In hot and dry complexions, they all have matter, and they say that burning is great help; and the other says the opposite: that burning is not good for disease that comes from choler and dryness. For the nature of hot fire is hot, and should not be curative for hot disease by choler, nor by dryness;
And then comes the one who says that cauterization does not help with the disease of heat and dryness that comes into the hearts of men. For when you perceive the chest of the patient and its moisture on the complexion of fire, you must quickly close the chest.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found it once by experience.
And all ways should be avoided as much as possible by him who has experienced it and knows the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the spaciousness of tens.
of other complexions we have no cause, just as in cold and damp diseases. And then they are supposed to fit together and agree with the cauterization.
Understand, children, that cauterization is a fire if it contains secrets of healing, and even more beneficial than fire medicine.
For the fire is simple, and only comes to harm to the member it is cooked in, and does not hurt other members.
The hot medicines come from one part of the body to another by moving them, and they bring diseases of grief to the healthy condition. And by chance, the patient was caught.
I had it for its height and for the goodness of its substance, which does not do harm, if it has no excess.
And I found it through experiment and the length of service and study I have given to this art, and it is true in things.
and because I apologize for the length of my speech, as I only like to tell you the secret that is contained in fire or water, and the quality of the work, as it affects the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says when demonstrating. 1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
1. Know, son, that the burns should be made in certain ways and not too tightly.
I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the wounds are not properly cared for by the help of cauterization. And I say that cauterization is useful for necessary pain and haste, which cannot be waited by the greatest malice that comes to the member.
And do not think less, dear fellow, if they follow the example of the master. For the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return. and he says thus.
and he says thus. but it is not so with everyone because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and drys the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines for hastening the courage, and for the virtue of his work and his nobility.
And it is possible that the disease grows once according to the complexion of the patient and the strength of the disease and its virtue.
And the surplus is acquired by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if not cauterized, it is administered to the patient or they have little surplus and moisture, just like cauterization for toothache, and the similar things, and part of the pain does not return. But this is rare.
And many people do not understand that cauterization is called the end of medicine, and this is true.
But they only believe that cauterization is useless after medicine, but they understand it to be false, and it is cauterization of medicine because when we have means of treating any disease in no way they are effective, therefore we administer our cauterization and it is useful.
However, it is well understood that cauterization is part of medicine, even if some do not agree with this.
The ancients said that cauterization of instruments of gold was as deadly as of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance.
and they said that cauterization of the lees does not make any difference, but this is not true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some men.
For the golden cautery, it is worth as much as iron, if they say so. And you know when you are heating an instrument of gold, you do not feel it when it is heated by the color of gold, and it has cooled down the most.
And if you heat it too much. If they put it in the fire. and it has enough prevention.
Or if you have ordered this chapter of the small joints, because it is easier to find.
oil cauterization is useful for moisture and cold in the eye socket, and when it is caused by a disease called "soda", and by many humors that descend to the small joints as the ears, and the ears, and by numerous sleeps and tooth pain and throat pain, and even by all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of diseases.
The form of this cautery is that if the patient is purged by medicine soluble modifying the throat III or IV, according to which virtue and courage and accustomation of the patient he can bear it. And then do the head of the patient again.
Then place the patient's head between your hands, and put your hands on either side of it.
After, place the root of your palm on the root of his nail between his two fingers. And if your two fingers come together, it will bleed, and then wash the fire cautery which is called "olivare", which is in this form: And place it on the thumb's signet of ink, and then slowly and gently pull down and stretch your hand a little at a time, and gently. Then gently relax your hand, and reward the nail if you see the first bone is very small. and if you do not see it, if the cauterization resumes as soon as you see the bone, like I told you.
after taking hold of the needle, and putting on some soft cotton, and placing it on the leg, and leaving it for three days.
after sewing with a fine thread. and leave it until the burn is completely healed. after treating the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacone", until it is healthy.
And tell him that as the wound becomes older, it purges more. And for this reason, assistance is needed.
And none of these say that too much fatigue is needed for the cauterization, but rather part of the bone should be burned, and then what is burned is removed, and it is treated.
And the other is that one should shave as long as possible, and then stick it as hard as possible into the bone until it is as wide as the woman's vulva, because the humors flow out.
And one should shave the overgrown wound long. After that, it should be cured and soothed.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be the best in any way, since in no man has it been found that there is fear.
And I think that I should leave it alone.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
And similarly when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more gentle and painless for me, and I therefore use it in order to assemble salute.
When the entire shoulder comes with chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, if it must use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purification of the shoulder and oils and plasters; And when you make the cauterization that we have mentioned before, it does not work. The head of the shoulder is dislocated when the patient is very sick and it is not too tight. Therefore, the fire cautery should be used on that part as we have previously described. After the fire cautery is applied to each corner of the shoulder joint as we have previously described, and then the fire cautery is applied to the part that is called "thongs". and they are held in place with ventouses. and hold your hand tight if you do not see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak to you later.
and it is necessary that the burns on the corners be more sensitive than those made on the child's head, and this is the form:
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and When there is sudden pain in the head of the child, and it spreads throughout the body, and the head is purged with medicines, and the other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of them benefit much. Therefore, I make the burns in two ways, that is to say, with medicinal herbs and with iron.
The burn made with medicinal herbs is if you take a dose of alum, and it helps to remove the scar and the rupture, and then they make the temple where the pain is held in a way that you can put the dose of alum back on the skin.
And when it is reset, if the limb is held well and left alone for twelve hours. Then remove the bandage and apply a poultice of oak gall, leaving it on for two to three days. Then dip your finger in vinegar as much as possible and press the wound.
After the application of ointment, when it is healed.
And if you see that any of these remedies for curing are not working, or if you have treated any medicines for curing and they did not work, then.
The iron burn is according to this method. Heat the iron burner in this way:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a cloak or has one hole for the beak, and appears to be small in size.
And he puts the painful shoulder on his hand, and hold your hand and gently pinch the iron until the half of the second that is long.
And hold your hand that the artery does not burn, which is cold, and there is abundance of blood.
After putting cotton on a needle, and put on the shoulder for three days; Then I put woolen cloth in a burr, and then treat the shoulder with ointment until it is healthy;
And if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all points, and keep the artery in this wound that is not too near.
of embolism
When you cure migraines as we have described in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before speaks of medicine and hard iron, therefore it is necessary that you walk the cauterization which is called "cultellare" as it is white.
and always keep the joint straight as if it were a line of half a dozen lines, and hold your hand once, and press so that you do not squeeze the artery and do not turn around.
and cover the mandible that moves when it is cut, and the nerves only have motion and spasm does not reach the patient, and cover the artery dislocation of blood when it is squeezed, or squeezed has great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced. and let the wound heal in its path.
However, I will tell you that blood clots when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
And if you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the wound in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cauterization that we have described or the chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterization that has two edges. And this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
2. due to cold ears
3. When pain occurs in the ear due to cold, and it is treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then use this cauterization that is called "points", and its form is:
After the patient has turned their entire head towards the ear, and holds the affected ear in both hands, and you carefully remove a small amount of fluid from the root of the ear because you have felt the ear loosen; and it has been X points towards each ear.
after treating the ear until it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
Torment that must be treated by cauterization is those that move due to inflammation, as we have said in divisions of the disease.
and do not make cauterization as if they come from scratching and sweating of nerves.
When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent from the fumes of urine and spit of gargle and throat, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you burn the patient with three burns. One at the root of the ear, and the other a hole burns the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips.
And puts the burn in the part that opens healthy, and he makes the burn in the place where the head of the ear is, and a hole burns the cornea of the ear, and another in the temple as long as some holes. And leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt too much.
And this is the form of cauterization:
And it is the appearance of cauterization that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it should be a little larger:
After treating the head as I have said before, as long as it is healthy:
When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then I have done four cauterizations: I cut off the two horns of the head, and I removed the head, and I also cut off the part called "vasels" as we have said before, and it was cauterized at the mouth of the stomach:
And treat them as we have said before.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and drugs that modify the brain.
After the patient's head is treated, and they place it on the Occiput, with the suture of sinapi that is written or treated as ointments.
And this is the way to cauterize: If you do it as I have said.
If it is not healthy, it is good; And if it is not healthy, make three cauterizations of the head descending from the top to the neck, and leave a space between each cauterization of one and two large ones.
When the patient is treated like the others, and if you see assistance, and the patient is suffering, you perform the burn cauterization in environment. And when skills are needed, there are two at the two corners, and the care until it is healthy.
And the burn cauterization called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have said before.
After the patient is washed with the physician, then I perform the burn cauterization on the head and at each corner, and the buttocks and three at the spine.
If you have more skill in this area, and the heart is wet and the patient is sweating, and the disease is advancing, if I make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it stay as long as the pain is the greatest, and hold your hand gently; after the cure as long as it is healthy, and the cauterization we call "olivare" that we mentioned earlier;
Of the epilepsy
Epilepsy should only be treated with fire cautery, and it must first modify the brain of years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffers from poor medicine.
And if it is children who cannot endure it, make a gargle and masticate with the brain often with raw meats;
after the child has been in the environment, and I make the cauterization according to what we said earlier, and the cauterization on the vein, and on each corner; When the patient suffers pain and trembles, if they have paralysis and muscular weakness, make a cauterization as I said to the one who has spinal and collarbone pain, at the tip of the spine and collar, and let the cauterization be olive-colored according to the way I described.
If the patient's hair is long, then I make a subtle fire cautery according to this method:
If due to melancholy the superfluities or moisture-corrupted and swollen parts are large, then the fire cautery should be applied to parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the descending superfluity is melancholic, and the patient's moisture-corrupted body is weak, then he should drink something according to what the brain is before in the division.
After removing the shoulder; after making a well-made slice, as I circled it, if you put it in your mouth.
And the shoulder if it twists, and hold it firmly with all parts.
After applying the ointment, and it is good to rub with old honey. And if the burn is too hot, then it can be endured. After the circle is cleared by dents, and it is left to cool;
and do this once a week with another government bone, as long as it is healthy.
If you see it burned, then make points all over the cauterization.
This method of cauterization makes the head wetter.
And then put on soft cotton in a burr and grease with linen grease.
of the hair of the eyebrows. When the hair comes first as eyebrows by the signs I mentioned earlier, then start and drink the mash thing cleaning the head, and all the moisture, and I made it soak more times in the morning.
After he has shaved his head, and I perform the cauterization on his head, and I cauterize on both temples, where the two eyes are assembled, or if one eye is separated, I do it in that one.
and cut all the veins and arteries that are exposed and are long according to the size of the temple.
and prepare for dislocation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then it is not as bad as you think.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery as you would it.
and never do you cauterize or harm the two bones of the lower part.
You see that it is excessive cold, and therefore I made the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the descent of the eyes: I cauterize the head, and you cauterize on the two temples, and you cauterize where the hair grows to remove the bones; And if it is too rough, then the cauterization is sharp on the scalp at every small cauterization;
When you treat according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore he should drink mare's milk three times a day; After the surgeon makes an incision, and I perform a cauterization or olive oil cautery. And I perform a cauterization called "clavilis" on the two horns, a little more than the cheeks.
And close the artery that you did not cover.
And this is the form of cauterization called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore cauterize with this olive oil cauterization. 1. "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long
And if you see that I perform cauterizations on the horns as well as the hooves are.
And do not let me leave my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
The first line translates to: "Long hair that does not touch the ground. Never has it happened that the hair of the oils is converted into horn, and prick the oil, and I make a cauterization according to the following ways: This is about fire, or ardent medicine.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are grown and even, then place the patient in your hands. After drawing a line on the skin of the eyes, make sure it is as long as the patient's eye and include the beginnings of the eyelashes.
Then apply a soft wax in the oil of beeswax and musk, then wash off the fire cautery with the form you have created.
After cauterizing the part that you have injured a few times, make sure the edges are clean.
And the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise at the point of the oil.
Then gently press with your hand, and leave for three days, then put fine cotton on the wound as long as the pain is intense. After the ointment treatment, when it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same part as you have done before.
And if the hair is burned as much as the paper is lifted to its natural hair, and is even, and it does not prick the hair with the eye.
The burning cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hair grow as long and even as possible, then make a piece of cloth in the shape of the mirror's edge.
Then take French soap and live chalk, of each one a .З., and mix them well together. And then I make it very well, if it does not cool down, then spread it according to the shape you made with the mirror's edge, and put it on the paper of the eyes. And if the disease stays in one place only, if it must be overlain in one, and they are merged into one. and put on the cotton soaked in oil in the corner of the urethra;
And the head of the patient is in your hand and you show the dose with the medicine, and press the poop and the mouth as often as the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it feels like burning like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine does not help you. And when the burning has passed, if you lift the leg of the awl, and then see if the paper is raised as it was raised by contraction of fire or by incision; If it is so, then it is well.
If not, then apply more medicine to the joint or if the medicine has not taken effect, as long as your joints are even and your limbs are steady.
Then put soft cloth on the wound as long as the edges are red, after cleaning the joint with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other similar ones, until it is clean.
If you have the skill to properly tend to your wound, with great care so that it does not lack in medicine.
And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair touches it, then continue applying the medicine to that joint that has become softened by the paper, in the same way as you have done before. After the cure when it is healthy;
and it is the form of the humorous dough:
And since the men's hair is different in size and thickness, according to your instructions;
and do not make it wrong the right way to that which is the study of this art.
The treatment of fistulas by cauterization
When you treat fistulas as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work well, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize according to this method.
Command the patient to put his head in your hand; and touch the members of his head between your hands in a way that it does not move and does not move his head;
after put cotton into the eye of oak or into the juice of persillon on the oil;
After heating the cauterization which is divided:
and it is twisted at the head if it forms like a hook of windlass, gather the wire so that it be the cauterization.
if you see, if it is pointed at the head to one and another, and if you see, if it is as a tent.
but this which is twisted is useful for your work.
After pressing the fistula it will be flattened, and in the gristle, and it is dried. and it is closed if the hand, and the gristle becomes the belly.
After placing the hot iron, and hold your hand on the iron at the edge where it meets the oil, so your hands do not burn. and place the iron in the oil grease, and it will become corrupted.
If you come to the beginning of the fire cautery on the bone, it would be good. If not, then relight the iron again, and if you manage to do it, and let it cool for three hours.
After that, put cotton on the wound and apply a drying ointment as soon as it is clean, and let it pass ten days without it being clean, if you apply an acidic corrosive medicine as soon as the bone is exposed. And so he follows what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterization of fistulas that no of the ancients said. Understand the fistula, and then the knee; Afterward, put in the fenestra, and there is a subtle change in this form: and they make it to the quantity of an .Z. of plunk; and hold your hand firmly on the fenestra, and do not move the patient at all, until the plunk is firmly set in its place;
and it is necessary to put on the oil with soft cotton wool in the corner of the eye or in the eyelid;
The plunk if it is art to the knee of the fistula, and the health of the saffron is saved;
If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer physick to the umbilicus, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is appropriate for the patient's own belly.
cracks in the lips Many times cracks in the lips are called "cracks" and also in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the cure does not help, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
And he puts it in those cavities as soon as they arrive.
After curing the wound so that it is healthy.
When abscess comes from the root of the gall or in the uterus, or from the teeth, after taking and lying down and it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula. And you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all. Therefore, you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula. After the bore or puncture of the fistula, and hold your hand until the wound is closed from the inside, and if it bleeds.
And I make once or twice, after we have cured what we have said in the cures, as long as it is healthy.
And if it is cured once or twice, it is good. And if not, then you must expose the bone and expose the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
When the thighs are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and it does not work, then put the head of the male patient in your mouth. After shaving the cauterant whose form came here in this way, as you put a collar around the tooth.
And he puts the fire cautery on the wound, and holds his hand so tightly that the patient feels pain coming from the root of the tooth.
After gently releasing your hand and continuing the fire cautery according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with salty water and scrubbing their teeth for an hour.
And in part, if the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain in the teeth comes due to cold, or it is cold, or visible, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary to know how to perform the fire cautery in two ways. and fire cautery and fire cautery.
Fire cautery, if they are such that you burn wool, and the end in a iron or copper cup. After taking cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a pin, and building a flame with wool, and then placing the tooth on it gently and holding it until it cools down.
And I often do so until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burning, and place the tooth on it, and then put a piece of iron as hot as possible at the end of the tooth.
The first line of the text translates to: "If the fire cauterization is such that it burns several hairs of iron or gold, and it is large so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
After heating the cauterization, if it forms a certain way, and places it on the tooth, and holds your hand until the cauterization is cooled down.
Do this often, as the pain will be less for you or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with hot butter in the pressure of this cauterization, and then it becomes red.
It is the form of the fire cautery:
And make the cautery as you wish, according to what you have;
It is the form of the needle:
The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules When the scrophules are soft and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, therefore wash the fire cautery blade after coming to its form, and it has openings for the smoke to issue from the other side;
and place the fire cautery on the abscess once, or it will be most effective, until it reaches the source of the abscess;
And if the swelling is slight, then use cauterization according to the amount of swelling, and leave it for three days. And moisten the cotton with wool as much as necessary until it is saturated.
After curing the limb of scars and wounds as much as possible when it is healthy.
When moisture enters the cold channels and at the same time when the complexion is cold, it is necessary that the patient be first treated with soluble medicines.
After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little.
After I made another burn at the other joint of the spine's head, and that is called the "clavicle" by us;
and cure the limb as we have said until it is healthy.
When all diseases of the shoulder are cold and moist, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an old disease, I make the burns on the parts you wish. and another burn at the hip between the thighs.
and that is called the "clavicle" according to the form that was said.
If you see, make cauterization by pricking all over the cauterization that is called "points" of which the form is here before in the disease of the ears.
and be the points just above the earhole, or on the outside.
After treating the limb according to what is mentioned earlier, and let the cauterization be at three points according to this form.
And for this reason, the fire cautery is lighter, because you make it three times a day.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After you have sewn up the patient's back and chest. after loosening the knot that is dependent on the titillation, you must loosen it with your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated due to moisture, rinse the cauterization that has II nerves of the ear, which is the form:
and cauterize the knot as it pierces the chest, and the wound of the cauterization will come together in four cauterizations.
For this is why fire cautery is made with a cautery that has three needles, because the appearance of cauterization is six cauterizations.
And are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has three needles:
2. And never has it been adjusted to this point because it has eight burns.
After you put on the cautery with the needle points covered with silk: After making the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long until they are well comforted:
And if it is dislocated, something comes out quickly, therefore a cautery is made on the thick part of the cautery clamp, or rather, the point where cauterization is pricked.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the pain is eased.
When coldness and moisture come to the stomach, and they are drawn out of it as soon as possible, and the purges are given to it, and according to customary cures, but it does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient's back be soaked with water, and his legs and hands are extended. For this, after the third cautery, I cut off the clavicle at the place where the amount of one is equal to the number of cauteries, and I divide the costals as much as the appearance of the cauteries is at three angles, and there should be space between them so that they do not become united as they grow;
And may the cautery be used if they touch the two parts of the ear, and the figure of the cautery should be according to this form and not be too large or small.
And if you see a large cautery being used on the stomach according to this form;
And the one who fears this cautery, should be cauterized by touching and pressing on the stomach and not according to the quantity you see in the chest; Then the cautery is completely applied to the cautery called "points";
After the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
And for the liver, there is pain from dysentery and moisture and large complexity due to excess of natural complexion; The patient should be treated according to what we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit him, then the shoulder may become inflamed due to its own reaction. Signs of encephalitis are recognized in this form and shape of cauterization, and according to the quantity applied to the liver, the epidural space is affected, or the head comes out.
And there is a gap between each cauterization and the growth of a tooth. And let the cauterization be long enough for the whole body, and do not press your hand on it throughout the cauterization.
And let only the half of the wound be exposed, and the patient should be on his side.
If it cannot be done, then make it as wide as possible, and ease the breasts.
And if you wish to do this, then when cauterizing these hot cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and make sure you do not burn the whole body, because you will dry out all the flesh. And may it not rise again to the bowels, because the flesh is very subtle and can be seen anywhere.
When it has gone into the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or the cloth. If he is in the char, he feels great pain but not too much.
And if he is in the toile, he may feel sudden pain.
And when this cure of the eyes does not work, it comes to pass that the patient's head is swollen.
And then open the shoulder or the abscess, and then heat the cauterization that is similar to the wound, according to which it is formed: And cauterize as much as the skin is burned, and it will be very painful, until the wound is healed.
After the treatment according to the treatment of the bones as much as it is healthy.
And no means can be found for this burn but for those who have studied medicine for a long time, and through these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Therefore, it is not possible to overcome it, and I believe it is better to leave it alone.
Therefore, it is not possible to overcome it, and I believe it is better
The ancients said that one should make of burns with roots of Aristolochia, and in the same way: Take a long root of Aristolochia, the longest you can find, and it should be dry, and as large and long as your two fingers: and make it into oil, and heat it, and cauterize it between the force and the col, and two small burns in descending in the part which is dry like the beard:
And the second cauterization is between the fifth rib and the seventh, at the back of a small pit. And the first cauterization is on the thigh, and the other on the stomach, and between the second spines, and the two hips defend the cauterization that is between the spines;
And do not press with your hand, but make it open widely as you smell.
And no ancient says that no man uses fire cauterization like the rasor, and they cut it and put it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the incision. When there is pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
However, in this case, there is no pain or death for the patient, or fistula that cannot be cured.
of the mouse.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterization that you should know.
However, there is a way if you make III or IV cauteries, according to the length of the hairs, according to the figure of the cauterization of the liver that we have mentioned before.
and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient be on his side or on his back.
and another way of cauterization if you have two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and soften the bone where the hairs are, or the pain of the patient comes from the side, and let the elevations that you soften on the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
After the fire cautery has been applied for two hours, and the burning sensation is felt on the other side, then take the cautery, and it will cause pain in four places.
And if you see, if you cauterize the entire fire cautery at three needles.
After the treatment when the patient has developed phlegm due to long tension, and it is necessary that the other treatments beforehand be said.
Cauterization is not for dropsy, but in the way that is called "ascites.
When you cure according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the bowels, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two at the back of the spine, and one at the end of the penis; And let the cauterization be well near the edge of the ear.
After the cauterization, let the patient lie down with their hair wet, and do not delay the treatment of the patient after the cauterization. And the healing will be faster, and the two intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization is on the abdomen, it is the clavicle that we have before to show it. And on the back, it is olive-colored, according to what is placed in front of it.
When the feet are wrinkled and are like amber, and they are flat, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the ear and the anus. And gently place your hand with the cauterization so as not to return.
And do not enter too much in front, otherwise it may be too rough for the awl, and let the fire cautery be according to this form:
After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the sharp point of the nail. and let the longer cauterization be on the outside of the thigh, in front, and the other on the inside of the leg.
and leave the cauterizations long enough to cure, as they are in their place.
after the cure of the other cures that we have spoken of.
When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vitamins and digestive substances that are in the stomach and intestines are affected and cannot be cured by usual methods, When you see the patient in great pain and with great courage, if they have had a cauterization on the stomach according to what they have spoken of before or a cauterization on the stomach, the cauterization circulates. And four cauterizations are made on the anus at all the fine cauterization wires, and two cauterizations are made on the thighs.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then perform the cauterization on the point, and the cauterization on each side, and the punctures in the stomach, for the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
of the cure of the hemorrhages
When the embolisms are either formed or formed at the base, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist humors that are corrupted, and they are treated as we have described in divisions, and there is no benefit if a cauterization is made: In the third line, they suspend the spine of the other side, which is completely bare and unevenly cut, and then perform the fire cautery on the buttock twice.
And if you think that his stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and the face starts to bulge, then the face on which the fire cautery was performed as previously mentioned, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cautery clavicle. And leave the fire cautery long enough. After the wound is healed, it will be healthy.
When you cut the wound, if the fire cautery appears to be too sharp, then put it completely on fire and then place it all burning on the wound. and it leaves so much of your hand that the cauterization does not reach the birth of the vein, because it is not cut.
do this once or twice, and if it does not come out, then cauterize each time as we have said. after the treatment of wounds, using them as much as they are healthy.
and if you cauterize with a large cauterization on the skin, it will give more help.
When the patient cannot endure tightness or opening, we will tell you about it in their own words, if they come to a serious illness that cannot be cured by cauterization.
When there is no fistula, and it is awake and gushes pus and corrupt moisture, if you provide total care to the wound, and keep the patient aware of the entire wound as much as possible.
After rinsing the cauterization that seems to be a rasor, and remove it through the fistula according to the amount that tries and is entered, and resume the cauterization as long as the corset is porris and corrupted, once, or twice, depending on the amount of the tumor.
And take care of the wounds of the nerves that are injured, and the large wounds.
If the fistula is at the course of the uterus and the intestine, and you treat these wounds, and do not use any other means than leeches, and think that it is not serious, then.
After treating the wound until it is healthy, and if the wound is clean, and the materials are long and strong, then you can be sure that the wound is completely healed.
And if the materials are not long and strong, it is certain that the wound is not healed, and the bone at the end is affected. And as for one of these that we will tell in his arm.
When pain in the head comes on, and large ventosity, and no woman can bear it, then it is necessary that you cauterize him on both sides of the head with the cautery clavicle that we have mentioned before.
And if we cauterize him in the environment, then there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will give more aid.
Of the bladder When the bladder is full and weak from headache and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then you should cauterize on the part opposite the bladder, where the hair grows at the opening, both on the left and right sides, and each one should be cauterized like a penis.
And you make the fire cautery on the back, or it will give you pain.
And the cautery stick should be made according to the form mentioned before.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for the formation of semen, and the flowers are rotten and their ends delayed. And when they come, it causes great pain. Therefore, it is necessary to cut the third cauterization through the belly, as we have said or cutting from the bladder, and it causes pain on the back.
And the cautery stick should be made according to what we have said.
When the moisture-like substances descend to the handle of the axe, and for this reason if it remains motionless in its sheath, then the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and if it is found that the thigh is in the wrong department, then you must cauterize the patient's shoulder on the axe handle in the manner of a circle, and hold the shoulder before the axe as it turns, so that the axe is outside the circle;
and if it is done in such a way that it resembles the cauterization of the stomach;
And if such cauterization is not present, then make three olive-sized cauterizations on the patient's thigh, and let them be as similar as possible to all the others;
and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
for the pain of the shoulder When pain comes in the shoulder bone, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have described in the division, and the treatment is not effective, and the disease is old. therefore it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with fetid pills or other bone-like pills. After I have done the cauterization;
and the way to cauterize is done in two ways: it is necessary to know how to assemble burning drugs and cauterize with fire.
If the fire cautery is performed in various ways, some of them are like this:
If you cauterize the horse's hoof, do it in this way: third, make a triangular cauterization according to this form, and have good depth and breadth, and leave between each cauterization the size of a thumb, and it will be olive-colored;
Never has it been done to cauterize on the neck of the horse's hoof, because there are four ways according to this form;
And if you see, if you cauterize at the circle we mentioned before in the displacement of the horse's hoof;
But I make it in such a way that the circles contain all the hair, and all the sharp points are cut.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the buttock and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the pain is severe as the surgeon says, I cauterize there at the ankle, IV times, on the left side, a small piece.
And if it is the cauterizing kind, and the sharp points are many.
And if the surgeon feels that the pain extends to two or more points or near the enquiry, then he should cauterize at the point where he feels the pain, either three or four in the cauterization which is called "points. And if it is skilled, then I will do more.
And if the pain is from the groin to the thigh, then it should be cauterized with a cauterizing iron or a circular cauterizing instrument. And you should take good care of all your cauterizations so that you do not cause further harm and damage to the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause more pain and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen more cases where cautery was done on the ankle, and they hurt so much that the entire leg became inflamed, and the toe as well, and it was noticed and corrupted in all the toes. After a solution of belly which he lost his life.
And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both sides according to this manner.
And the wise ones said in the cauterization of the thigh, whether it is this way or that, I will do it in such a way and so large as to be as big as some nail's head or a smaller one, and it should be intertwined and interwoven, and should be spaced out and spaced apart, according to the quantity of a new nail's head.
and be between the intercostal muscles of the second part, and also like bones, and if it has a good piece of iron.
and this is the form.
And wash it as much as it is red and gritty, and then put it on the mallet of the malaise hail, and be twisted around the sharp chest.
and the cauterization is once the cautery is made and left for three days. and then apply a plaster of burr, and leave the wound open long ten. after the treatment of ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use very little of this cauterization due to its harshness, and few people use it.
and all that is harsh cauterization, which can be endured, and later it does not matter.
If the ardent cauterization is that you make and an instrument with interlocks in the corner of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel, and in the high part has us, and between each the quantity of the growth of a tooth. and be overwhelmed and connected, and they are joined together according to this form:
After placing the handle of the axe on the patient's shoulder, which is firmly grasped, and pressing your hand firmly against the handle of the axe. After heating the hot water in the pot and leaving it for an hour, the patient suffers from the pain and inflammation of the wound.
For it also has the effect of burning as if by fire.
And when the mordication has passed, take your hand with the instrument and gently lift the handle of the axe, leaving it for three days, and then cover it with as much as the black part of the eschar is healed. And let it remain for three days without food or drink;
and that would be the assistance from the side after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that burns according to what you have done in the shoulder.
And this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written or treated about the correction of medicine. Take alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, mix them together, and put them in a new pot. or there is a small hole that can be pointed with a razor and entered.
or there is a small hole that can be pointed with a razor and entered. and place on it another and better one, and place some alkaline and salt and soft ash on it, until you have made as many powders as you will have in your hand.
And he leaves it as is until the water comes down with the ague and chill, then takes all of this water, and mixes it with chalk and alkaline soap as before.
And when it will be in the heat and is maintained in the mouth of medicines and in cauteries of other members.
For it makes the work like fire, and if other medicines are used well, such as burning the heel with honey and anacardic acid and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Galiens tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain in the thigh and sciatica, and he said that no other remedy was needed, and that it was cured in one time after this remedy, and he was bathed as he instructs afterwards.
And then in this way that you prescribe green leaves with fresh and dry verdure, and the mouth is greased with a little fat, and it is placed on the heel, the thigh, and the leg where the pain is, and it is tied.
When left alone for three hours, the patient no longer feels the pain.
Then I make him enter a bath as long as the chest is raised, and then I let him enter a cold bath, and the pain will all leave and he will be cured.
And you advise that no one should use such cauterizing medicines after the evacuation of blood.
Dyascorides says that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with goat's hair, it helps to relieve the pain.
And it should be made in a particular way. Take the mustard and beat it with oil, and put it in the hole that is between the thumb and the other which is called the fossil.
After drying the goat hair, and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on the hair, and leaving it as long as it remains stained.
And repeat the process again, and continue doing it as long as you feel by touch that it is returning to its place, and that the pain is ceasing.
And these methods of cauterization are called "goat's cauterization".
Of the pain in the back of the neck
When pain comes to the back of the neck, whether from scratching or percussion or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, rather it is for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
After the patient is free from drugs or other substances, and they are lying on their back, if the pain persists, three lines of incisions should be made, and in each line, cauterize or more according to the will and ability of the patient.
And it should be done with the cauterization according to the one called "points".
And if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the clavicle mole according to this form:
This disease often affects many children, and the signs of the beginning are that they strangle when they start to grow, and cry. and you push on the back of the spine and on the appearance that comes with the other spines.
When you see this and you see it heal, if the cauterization is done on the cauterizing tool according to this form. If the cauterization becomes brown in every part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the end of the spine with the cauterizing tool touching the second or third line and they are points close to each other.
After healing the limb to the extent that it is healthy according to what we have said, and you are warned that you will not perform a fire cauterization on the gilbositeit which is in the spame of the nerf.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints due to moisture is expanded to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and remedies by medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in a certain way:
make the cut of cauterization at the end of the joint, and the olive-oil cauterization in this form:
If he thinks that you prick at the cheek, then he orders a burn to be performed on the entire area claimed as "point". When the pain comes to the knee and other joints, and this happens often, I would cauterize on each knee three times or four times on each part, using olive oil.
And if you have more skill, but do not hold your hand for as long as it takes to see the effect,
If the pain descends to the jaw and back, then he administers the cauterization we have mentioned in this chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands, then make points every two lines.
And if there is no more pain, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
And if the pain comes to the wrists or spines, then cauterize each part and give the patient government to the midwife and medicines.
For if you make the patient govern with medicines and purge the blood, then they will be cured by God.
When rupture comes in writhings, and the bones descend as strings, and it is novel, if it happens that when you see to cure it, it does not lose its juice; and that it uses things that relieve the stomach, if it descends from its stomach;
After the wound is placed on your back between your hands, and he commands that you shave your hair until it is smooth, and cuts it with your nails, and signs of healing appear on the bone point, and there are signs that resemble half of a circle at the corners of the corners;
Then rinse the cauterization with the form that is here, which is his shape;
As long as it is white and has a glistening feel. Then reset the buns on their legs; and he shaves his hand on what it does not return;
and works well on the thighs of the patient, and puts the ointment and the salve on the thighs, and the other on the place where he shaves the hands;
Then place the cauterization at the sign with all your hand, and hold it right and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, then continue again as soon as you touch the bone. and be gentle with yourself so that the bile does not rise when you do the cauterization. so that you do not burn it. and so that the patient does not die, or other wounds.
And you should know when you come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are worthless.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done gently according to the size of the part, and also for adults, according to their size.
after three days, cure the leg of the patient as much as possible until the burn is healed.
after the treatment of other wounds as much as possible until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 14 days on the side where the wound is painful.
and it is necessary that his nails be long, so that the feces do not stick when he goes to the bathroom in private rooms.
And after 14 days, when he wants to get up, make him wear a well-made girdle, and every other day.
and take plenty of rest, work hard and do not drink too much beer and wine, and do not snore too much.
And when this teaching is made, it is entirely healthy.
And I will say this after the cutting in his chapter.
When routs (hernias) come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, the fire cautery is applied again according to its quantity, and it should be done in three places. After the treatment according to what we have said.
And no of the ancients have said that it should be done at the fire cautery at three angles according to this form.
1. The shoulder rises and I make a line for the width of the fracture, and another for the defense, and hold the patient's hand at all the cauterization point.
2. But the first cauterizations are more gentle and milder.
3. there is no pain in any limb. 4. When pain comes in any limb, whether from cold or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the point called "points", and to cauterize according to the length of the limb, its thickness, its weakness, its location of torsions and its pain.
If it is healthy for the first fire cautery, that is well.
If this is the case, continue with another fire cautery on it, for custom is that one must die in the member that is proximate, because it comes to the fire cauteries as long as the pain is healthy.
The remedies are never helpful once through cauterization, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Can you see the cauterization, prepare yourself if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and do not hesitate or lose hope, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, therefore I perform the cauterization on the head of the chief: I emme the head of the chief, and the other towards the front at the end of the cuts: and it touches the two horns, and it behind the hump:
and so much of your hand that the cauterization lives on the bone, and so much that the pus comes out forcefully, as if the vapors of the large humors can come out:
and the cauterization is done on mice according to what is before.
And if the burning is everywhere sparse. And if the burning is manifested, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these burns that we have mentioned or chief, and I cauterize in one go, and II cauterizes on the point of the shoulder, and VI cauterizes on the point of the back, and I grant on the croupe and I other delves, and II sus the II espaules; and II sus the wrists and II sus the tendons of the foot, and I suspend each joint of the hands and feet, and II suspend the fissures of the hands;
and remove the bones that are underneath the heel, which you do not burn.
and never made a fire cautery on the bone, and the other on the stomach, and the other on the liver.
And be careful, the more you make a fire cautery, the more help it provides, and it profits you.
And be careful, the patient does not feel pain in the fire cautery if it is done correctly, because the body is already corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be both large and small according to the parts and joints of the body, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
After curing the dough with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is safe.
When the wound is healed in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then I make a fire cautery on the member according to its size and thinness.
and let the cauterization be a small amount entered into the flesh. then the treatment of wounds as soon as it is safe.
And no time is it made to cauterize and at the hand and on the thigh and on the back, after the issue of the bone that makes the member motionless, and if it is not removed from the flesh.
and nothing else enters if it is not known of the members and the issues of the moving bones in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is aroused, and the art of medicine finds nothing, therefore cauterize with a small amount of caustic on the flesh, according to the quantity of the flesh, as long as the member is motionless and has its color.
Then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and of colic and wind, of each a part. And mix all together, and bind with a cloth, and apply to the shoulder as often as it is healthy.
The treatment of syphilis by burning
When syphilis appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the burning is done with a fire cautery that seems to form a circle, it should go around the entire syphilis.
And everyone says that you make a fire cautery at the gum of syphilis.
And everyone says that this does not seem right, because I doubt that it is ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to do this once.
And the most correct thing is that they are burned outwards, at the cautery called "circular", as we have said in our mouth about cauteries.
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays to die either by the excess it does or by the old age of the patient who is too weak (that is, too many) and has little blood, or by the tension. and you see it hurting to die. However, the cautery is done by pricking with thorns. after it is left alone. For it will struggle to die.
And if you see it perishing at all the cauterization, if you heat the cauterization of this form:
And put your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has perceived the heat, and such are the cauterizations that the patient feels deflated in a certain way that the course of the pulse is alleviated.
After the treatment, if it is perfectly healthy.
Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing more than a swelling of the limbs, as it also dries out the hands like the feet.
If you see this disease in the joint that can suffer from fire cautery, then sharpen the thorns to prick small and large, according to what is suitable for the joint or the disease.
After the cauterization of all parts as much as you remove all corruption, nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted will not ossify.
Then let it rest for three days, and apply oil to the burned parts as long as the blisters from the hot fire are still intact and all corruption has subsided.
After the care of the burns caused by fire.
And if you see after three days that healthy children are born, that's good.
and if not, then resume the cauterization where there is need for more corrupt legs.
And this malady has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of the fire cauterization.
but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said the cure of the ague disease in the division. Take the amount you have at your disposal.
Of the porings that come to the feet Many times it has happened that the feet were affected by a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing to be done which hurts the foot.
1. And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways. 2. It is to know that cauterization by fire and hot water cauterization.
If you are scalding, then the scald is like a pen made of hot iron, and it should be made as large as possible so that all parts can be covered, and there should be subtle margins.
After you put the scald on all parts of the joint, turn your hand completely around the joint until it reaches the end of the joint. And it will remain for three days until it begins to excrete sweat. Then make a poultice of boiled wheat and leave it on all night, and the joint will become painful and will be desrooted from its roots.
Then, treat the wound with ointment by applying it as soon as it is healthy.
If they are converted through deflection of the heart, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must have a hot iron cautery. and it is in this way: Take a nail or iron bar, or a feather quill, and put it on the joint and the tendon, which is to know how to remove corns. and put the nail on so that it burns all around, then put a bit of hot wax, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the margin of the nail reaches the root of the screw, and then find the hot iron way perfectly fitting near the root.
The patient suffers from the pain of a bee sting for a little while. Then it will leave him alone, and it will die at its roots.
1. I make another after that, as long as you are aware of all these that are in the course, then you cure the wounds that engorge blood.
When some tremble from cold, or fever, or another, if it comes that you must apply four cauteries or four on the back of the spine, one cauterization between each spine. And you apply an iron cauterization or a pearl cauterization, and at the stomach with the olive cauterization.
If you let it tremble, and it will recover its health from the cold disease.
None of the time appear by defuers the corps baths, or pustules come from large materials corrupted.
If it is necessary at the first when they appear that a fire cautery is made on each pustule's head: A subtle cautery of mithra's coal, or if the point is seized by fire, or of the cautery of Aristotle's root, or at the lenticular cautery.
And never is the cautery made at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it cannot grow new wounds forward, but it is disordered by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there have been great dislocations of blood from the artery that is covered by the wound that comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the fire cautery of the member, and similar things. and it is a great grief to cleanse.
And all that when there is none, if you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press as much as it can until the pain is calmed by your index finger, and no more blood comes out.
Then put olive oil cauterys of various sizes that are all red.
Then I proceed, according to the size of the wound and the strength of the limb, and I route the cautery along the artery, and place the cautery on this vein or where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery until it is no longer painful.
And if it hurts when you tie the vein with your other hand after the cautery, and the cautery is extinguished, then take immediately another cautery that is on fire.
And continue to do this one after another until it is not painful.
and make sure you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes to the patient.
and be sure that when you do not cut the artery, it is not possible to cause pain immediately if the artery is large, as this can only be done by one of the four methods we have mentioned. If by cauterization or extraction it is not treated immediately, or by tightening the thread, or by medicines placed on it that cause pain, then then it should be tied and extracted.
Whoever will perform the restoration of the tie very tightly with threads or to put things burning on, or other similar things, will not benefit from it if not.
And if this happens to no one and there is no medicine present, then you should place your index finger on the wound as we have said, and firmly press until it is painful in the wound and the vein. and do not move the patient, but the cold water is often too cold that it makes the wound cold and swells and causes pain.
and make up questions before those that have to do with what he knows about cauteries and medicines.
Our first chapter of medical treatises mentioned that for all diseases, if it is necessary to burn or use hot medicines, we must know the causes, effects, forms, and types of cauteries.
and I have written this chapter of cauteries for the head and neck, and I will enter this chapter through my own path because it is lighter to write about this than about other parts.
2. And if I begin this, it is necessary, my dear, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; When there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you are foolishly doing this. For many methods of people come in the treatment. If there are those who have become ill with such a disease that they died lightly by the force of the remedy they took for their disease and the greatness of their malice. And this is cause for fear.
And those who say to you, Wait, I am hungry. And the disease is untreatable.
It is only by your consent that those who come to you who have this manner can be treated, but put more trust in your honor than in your covenant, and do not give in completely but wisely of what you are certain, and what you could have taken and lost.
And use prophecy and indication in the care of your patients, so that health may be converted.
and this good reputation, fame, and memory will help you.
Very dear friends, our Lords give you good understanding and right judgment, and if you will seek the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or if you have ordered this chapter by consulting physicians, according to what is done by physicians who practice cauterization, which I have advised for the chief joints, because you will find it more easily that which you will use.
Sages, this disease often affects infants in the womb, and when the head is pulled too hard on the child's chin.
and never has it been caused by anything that could not be found out.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all those I have seen, it has always led to death. And because it seems to me that I should make a chapter in part of the treatments.
And I see the child of whom the head was swollen with fever, and the chief grew larger each day until he could no longer bear it.
and thought so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled between the bone of the shoulder and the bone.
and the ointment is such that the moisture is between the shoulder and the bone, and the abscess is small, so you should give the patient a wide slice of the head.
and so long as the swelling corrects itself.
And here is the form of the spatulum:
2. If the fever is more severe and the abscess is larger, then I will make cross-shaped cuts according to this form.
When the moisture is drying out the bone, and you see the signs of the corners of the cheek being pulled tight by each part, and the sudden jump is what you feel when you press your hand on the bone, and it is not a lie to say so. If you want to sell the cheek III wares according to this method:
Then after the incision, remove all the moisture. After pulling out the wrinkles and powders, and mix in wine and oil, and let it sit for five days.
Then take the dressing and apply it to the wound with needles and pins, and let the cheek be evenly pressed, and then mix in dry, moisture-free meat with the surgeon as much as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is to look or open the large end of the abscess, and assemble the angle.
for no time has it been in front. never behind. never to the right. and never to the left.
Measure accordingly the size of the abscess opening and the angle of the wedge, and they are made according to what you have at your disposal.
and make sure you do not cover the artery. and come quickly to relieve pain, if the patient dies from dehydration and evacuation of blood.
When there is any disease called "catarrh" in the ear or nostril, and the disease is ancient, and the cure by medicine does not help much, therefore it should be treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes closed, that the patient makes a fist. After rubbing the thigh with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull the patient's hand up along the entire cloth. Then look at whether the vein bends, and the two are responded to after the ears, and they are not the same.
Then mark the veins with a sharp needle, then cut one and the other with a needle of II parts, as far as the size comes to the bone, and that is by the widest part of the fist.
And if you see, cut the cloth away from the artery and press on it with the needle, while cutting as much as possible, like II does to the bone.
When the vein is punctured, if the blood does not stop continuing.
And if the artery does not open with feeling, then it is necessary to measure the amount of spice for three doses, and then add and make it juicy to the bone.
and if it is necessary to give six doses of blood, and by chance more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If the wound is still attached to the bone, and the bandage that was applied does not come off, then tighten the wound and hold it in place, and the cure of antiseptic as long as it remains healthy.
Of the migraine When the migraine comes, and the forehead is pounding, with pain in the temples and headache, and sometimes other symptoms, it is treated with medicinal cures and all remedies do not help, if we cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
And the manner of extracting them if the patient makes the hair on his temples fall, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly responded to rather than in any men who are too faint.
and if it is responded to, then tightly grabs the neck of the patient from different directions, then rubs the face with a rough cloth, and wets the face with hot water until the artery opens clearly. Then take the spatula of this form: then lightly scorch the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and take off as many threads as there are from each part.
When the artery is subtle, if it reaches the tip of the nose, then the loop of that part follows according to the number of the two heads. For if it is not cut, then it will not jump out without pain at all.
And draw out five pints of blood, about three.
And if the artery is large, then draw out the blood in two pints of a double strong silk thread, so that no poison comes before the wound, and it comes out with the blood.
Then tie off the excess that is between the two lines in that hour, and then, if you see, if it cauterizes as much as the bone, until the heads are tied.
And it is the patient's turn, if the helper does not have a fever and has a hot complexion. For the fire cautery helps to end the moisture. Because it is of greater help than moisture.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the limb with many layers of soft cotton and ties it well made.
And when one loosens it, if one uses dry medicines that make the wound clean and tight, and tents as long as it is safe.
And if there is no artery cort without your work, if you hurry too much through the cauterization, or you use your hand with vitrol and tighten it until it is stained. If you do not have this present, then put your hand on the leg as much as it can be, and make it cold with water as much as possible, and hold it tightly as it can be.
And it should have between the two cuts a large amount of spices, and then when you see the two legs filling up, hold the fire in your hand as long as it stays on the bone, and cover the vein with the two legs. And let them be far apart between the two heads, for it is not easy to do this cauterization all at once.
And this is the form of the cauterization:
What is more dangerous and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cautery, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer on the wound. For when the stomach is too empty, it retains less food.
of tears When the tears of the hairs are descending into veins that are soon to become dry and hot from fire, and there is no benefit from medicine, and you see the patient's face swelling up, and it feels like the limb is moving, and it seems like a convulsion; And the wounds are thin and moist, so that the hair of the paper is cut, and the papers are torn, and burned by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this treatment. And it was called the ancient "bruised cure," and that you should cut the patient's hair according to the disease, either at the front or the back, then I made three cuts or the back equally according to the length of the back.
And it was called the ancient "bruised cure," and that you should cut the patient's hair according to the disease, either at the front or the back, then I made three cuts or the back equally according to the length of the back. and it should be one of the cuts like the other two, which I made at the front by advancing the scissors, and the others I made with the paper as a guide, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are made with the paper.
and move your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound should have three to the joints.
and make a piece of sponge and moisten with cloths the sore, then cut the sponge into pieces of two parts each, and this is the form:
of the incision that is made in the temple just before the second incision; and scar all the tissue that is between the two furrows throughout the entire facial skin that is under the bone, then make another piece of sponge just after the other second incision, and then remove this sponge. 2. If the bone is broken in the first fence with the instrument called "cultellary," and it is very sharp on one side and very blunt on the other, do not be too sharp, and this is its shape:
3. And cut the costelet along the bone to the knee, and the costelet is blunt towards the bone, and the bone as far as it reaches the second fence.
And cut all the veins that descend from the head as soon as the incision is continued until it opens the curtain, and then make another piece of sponge just after the other second furrow, and then remove this sponge.
Then the pain is alleviated, and the patient expresses the limb for the pain taken.
Then, in each fold, a piece of soft cloth is placed, and dampened sheets of linen and oil and vinegar are placed on top, and it is ensured that the patient does not get cold.
And at the third day, the linen is removed, and a large amount of watery mustard is applied, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other ointments that are used to treat wounds, until it is healthy.
If any blood clots come, you will see the hairs thin and brittle, the eyes waver, and the papers burn. When the hair grows, and if it causes pain, and the patient suffers; and you advise them of these accidents that these matters and this catharsis do not come from many veins, and the remedy which is in it if it is;
And it is that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut along the front of his head, and another wide one in the middle. And begin from the fending of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be close to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with the mingeir;
And when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto an sponge, and then press between the two lips of the fending and put a piece of cotton on it, and tie it with lin; Then apply some softened wax mixed with oil, and keep it away from the fire.
When it is cold, if you rub the bone until it becomes rough and begins to crack, then the treatment of things that cause inflammation, which are like nails, is necessary.
In this way: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of collogene, and make a paste. And apply it to these wounds to cause inflammation for all.
Of the ear's chill
All that is done to the ears is one of the four things. Or grains, or beast, or mine piercing, or similar thing if it can be made like this. If you sow, like thistles, fires, and pits; If water flows, like hot and inflamed, and similar things;
When he pushes something into the ear hole or another way of thing that does not fit well in the ear, and it does not grow in the ear, if he puts the ear to the sun.
If you see the wound, if no drop of blue oil or oil of sinew is distilled, then the extraction is made; and I make the patient hold their breath, and it stupefies the nostrils as they exhale, and put on the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear at a distance;
Many times comes out fire through this treatment;
And if it does not come out, make the extraction with fine tweezers, and its form is:
If she jumps with force using her hands, it is good.
If she does not, then she should perform an extraction from the subclavian gland with small difficulty.
And if she does not jump by this, then I make a hole in the arm and cut off the end of the ear or the opening of the ear, and stop it which is inside the ear wax if it can enter with the hole. Then the tail is formed because often comes so as we have said.
And if she does not come in this way, then he takes glue of the dog and takes the bones, and puts any instrument that is not for this purpose, and puts a piece of cotton inside. Then press the gluteal muscle through the incision or whatever it may be, and draw out further.
And if it does not come out of all these things that we have said, then do not hesitate to tear the ear off rather than cause an abscess and spasm.
And the manner of tearing if you do it first with the shoulder joint, and remove as much blood as possible according to its strength, then place the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear towards you, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or depending on it; and so the burn is like a moon, as you approach the piercing, then the bone follows your pain, and the blood flows heavily in your mouth.
and the cure until it is healthy.
And if it is grainy and begins to ooze, then apply the extraction;
And if it cannot be squeezed, then apply the following treatment according to this form: and give an incision to that grain.
But do not make this mistake when you think the grain is moist from the ear's moisture, as long as you have made many pieces of it;
then use your fine tweezers and the sugar, as we have said, if the extractions are healing;
In the fever therefore that happens in the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the condiement of the first essence and makes the ear ample with soft cotton. And let them be placed on the same ear or where the wound is. If it jumps for that reason, it's good.
If it does not, then if you take many piers according to the length of your arm, and wash them in hot water, they will become lighter. and then put the helper on one ear, and pull out from it its other parts, and carefully through another hole in the ear. and continue to do this piercing over and over again until the pain subsides completely, and then it will be all better.
If you see, if you take one joint and burn the other end of it as hot as possible until the pain increases, then it will be better.
Then I made another incision as much as it needed, until it was all out, as we have said in the wound.
In the removal of the fetus, if it is small in size, like a pea and similar things, cure as we have said in the division.
but if it is large in size, it can be felt, by using forceps for the extraction. and that is the thing that is easier to open in the ear.
In the removal of the earwax from the ears, if you open it as we have said in the division and treat with distillations, but the cure does not work, if you look at the ear with the sun, it will work. If he does not open it at all, if the needles are subtle, and if he does not notice, if he takes the rope of copper as it is formed:
And let it be tight and wide and long. And cut off the more subtle head of the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient has, then they will form the rope completely. Do this often until you see it all.
And if they do not obey, then soak the rope of cotton as I have said in the hole.
And if they do not become sharp as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the decision of the verses, and you will find them or treat them with distillations.
If you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, then the form will be as you see: And let silver or gold threads be inserted into the small holes, and then they should be distilled.
And to press the distillation with the well-made silver instrument, and if you see the raizer and envelope around the tip of the cotton, then your oil or juice will gush out, and whatever you see of your medicines in the canal, the canal should be in the ear.
Then pour the oil from the raizer all over the cotton, and press your hand together until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear. And it feels the pain of the patient, and it is the distillations that are given, and they are poured into the ear at any time, as they are distilled in the ear. And keep it from being too cold, as the medicine would not work if it were not bone-cold.
Of the ear's chill
No child is born without having purulent otitis in both ears.
And this same thing happens as a result of swelling of the wound, or of the ear drum being torn, and these swellings never go away in the ear, if one cannot see.
And never has too much fluid been given, and it is seen that it is not good.
The one that comes from the font is, if it cannot be seen, a sign of successful healing in other situations, and in this case, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun. and observe: if you see the apparent inflammation, if it has healed completely, then this is the form of it:
And so, and turning and bending before and after, if it does not hurt the ear:
if the inflammation is around or at the edge of the ear, if you hold it with thin tweezers and a light grip, as long as it is not too tight:
And if the exfoliation is in the ear, if I take a soft and light raser and scrape it slightly and heat it up a little, then I put it or cors of the ear.
If you feel the ointment that the patient hears is bitter, gently pierce, and keep your fingers away from the ear.
Then place a tent according to the large piercing of the ear, and apply Egyptian ointment. Do not use any ointment until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and apply pink ointment and powdered vitrol broiet.
And if you see swelling in the ear, if it covers that you pull the tent and rub a smooth tent made of rose oil and wax, as long as the swelling is red. Then the cure, as long as it is healthy.
2. If the dislocation occurs, then dip a sponge and wring it out with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the dislocation which are treated with distillations.
This is the cure that comes in paper from hairs when they are wet and dry, if you extend them with needles and tweezers, and the cope of a spatulum of its roots. Then put the head vitriol broiet.
And if it is not decorted, then the fire cautery subtle lenticulaire is applied, and the cauterizer after the incision must be moistened.
And they are often repaired, but nothing dulls its roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the grit Many times, things come in papers from the hairs that seem crooked in their form and hardness, and for this it is this disease called "granular" and is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of these and soaking. The dissection is such:
The dissection is such: The granular is such that it is silent on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know.
Then make the wound larger, then lightly burn each part, then take it with forceps and the cover.
If you do not burn it with feeling a little paper, if it does not hurt the patient.
When the dislocation is large, if it is assembled with a stitch, and the care is given as soon as it is healthy.
If it is small, if no force is applied, because the repairs will be slow and unnatural.
If the dislocation descends towards the ear, if you turn it inside out, and the dislocation is held with tweezers, and the cuff presses from both sides.
If the paper is moved by the incision, it does not hurt anything.
When the dislocation is cupped, if you lift the salty oil, and care for the leg as much as possible until the patient is healthy.
Of the fat of the hairs Exinach is a grease that is woven into the sheets of papers used, and this happens more as children grow older, and it grieves their eyes, and they come to the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears are in their eyes.
and because they lie down in their wet beds and sleep, and the papers of their cradles are soaked with the grease that envelops them and have the appearance of having been affected by the exinach that is open to the oil. And when you press your hand on your two and feel exinach in your eyes.
And the manner of the chapter is such that the surgeon places his head in your hand.
Then take a piece of thread, and make a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, and then put it on. and press with your two hands on both sides, so that the exirnach is assembled in the circle.
Then place the moisture in the spatumile and cut a fendure that is as wide as the wound you make in the healthy part of the vein;
and make the thread as long as you can reach the exirnach. and in other arrangements, exirnach comes from the fendure, according to the shape of a piece of greasy wax.
1. Pull the thread all around your two legs, and turn your left and right hand as much as it is possible until it is apart.
2. And make sure you do not cut in the tendon, that you do not go to all the muscle until it is, and that you do not wound it.
3. And if the thread does not open at the beginning of the cut, then lightly open a little part of the cut until it appears.
4. Then pull the thread as we have said, then soften the threads with oil and water, and put it on the leg, and draw it well.
3. And if such men who bruise their sails and put on to corrupt the moisture which is dried up.
Then the doctor when he is healthy.
And if an abscess comes to the leu, then the doctor should use incisions that are gentle when he is healthy.
hairs of the papers When hairs grow on paper that is not of its nature, and it is watched, if it harms the eyes, and brings forth methods of diseases as common tears and softening of papers and albugines, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
and the cure is according to four methods: or by fire cauterization, or by medicine according to what is in front of the cauterization or chapel, and it is made or by incision and stitching or by needles, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your left hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your right hand.
If she is converted, it is good. If not, then insert an awl into all the holes. And make the edge of the paper or the hair grow from these hairs, and pull the thread through all the paper, and turn it to the other side.
Then, in the other part of the paper, adjust the hair so that it is even with all the nails, from the large to the small.
Then pull the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and drape on the paper, then sew a figure on the paper as you would with a needle, and if it is not equal to the quantity you see being lifted by the paper that is supposed to be drawn, then it will be correct.
And if a part that has skill cuts much paper according to the quality of the paper, whether it is soft or not.
Then do all the sentences you have signed in the second line, and start with large, sharp scars. And it is one of the fissures near the natural hairs as they grow in size, then cut the root, then scrape the bone at one of the two corners, then scrape it all.
Then assemble the two lips at a stitch with a needle of one thread for all the fine hair, and remove the blood, and dry the excess hair on the nails at any glands you see, if you see this done.
If this is not treated, then leave the stitching and threads for three days or four.
Then treat the wound with dried things that are constricting, as the paper relaxes from the wound's moisture and assembly, but the stitching is too tight (as they say in old times), and it is uncomfortable. And if another way:
And if another way: And if you recognize the paper as a figure that is also like the force of fire, as we have told, at three incisions, follow the form that is here:
Then comes he who overcomes with equal strength according to the form as it is now:
And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take an awl or if it has one thread, and make the figure fit. And cut another piece of thread as large as the largest needle, and then a smaller one, and sew them together evenly between your two threads.
Then gently press your hand evenly, and gently press all the leather where you have made a cut, as we have experienced, then sew the two sides of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healthy.
And when the abscess comes to your incision, if the pain and swelling are alleviated by creams and compresses.
And never has it happened that the hair of the paper is converted.
If you follow what we have said about the incision.
The sutures on both sides are more artificial.
The patient is treated for bites if they follow this form: And if you convert the paper and make it according to what I said, then make the bites by hand, and tie them as securely as the paper and the length of the staple is. And cut as you hold the pieces, where you hold the threads.
Then assemble the two subtly, following what is underneath the paper oil, and draw the bites from the two parts formed. And it leaves no wounds, and the leather that is stretched will become thin, hard, and wrinkled, as long as it is on it.
If it is delayed, if the wound has strong forces, then the care until it is healthy.
And when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted, and no more hair will be tied.
And it is the form of the second incision you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
The veins are such that you need a fine needle, and I cut a thread of silk and thin. Then assemble the heads and soak the other slightly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long.
Then order in the chase the other thread of silk briefly, and note the chief of the thread.
Then put the patient's thread in your hand.
And if you can see the sun, then cut and decline the hair, for these are subtle and thin hairs, then pull out all the hair in one go at the root of the hair that is not yet gray, and trace it on the paper as you pull out the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair up to the end of the chase, and pull out the hair in the chase, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then, pull your hand as soon as the hair grows to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hair is treated and the hair does not grow with it, then you will cut off the hair at the end of the thread as you have ordered, until the hair grows and you see it by the sight of the oil.
However, if you cut off the hair and the thread, and close the oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the wound appears.
And if the hair is short, then accompany the long hair of the cheeks with the one you left, until it is elongated and then lie down.
Of the oily substance When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the food comes in the oil, if it comes in two ways:
1. naturally, and 2. unnaturally.
And comes through wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
And the way of the wound is that you cut it, and clean the edges, and put on bandages of linen, and keep it until it is healthy.
And only that you use in the treatment of the wound things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, then the disease becomes worse than the first.
but it works on things that soften, like figs. And the head of the wound or gash and its seed is cooked, and the ointments are melted into no oil at all, and wrapped in a tent, and the treatment of this.
And your treasures are if you keep guard that it does not become wet according to the form it was before.
and the cases we have said no one has been worse than the remedies of this disease, that it does not relapse according to the form it was before.
This disease, which is truly called "acarati", is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and burn and cauterization and things similar.
And the path of the dislocation is that if you prick with a needle, if it has double the thickness, and the thread in the char, and I feel the other side of the larmier as much as the first, so that the threads come in II chiés of the char.
Then the char is at the end of all the needle, and the cap is wide in the saturate. And if it seems like on paper it returns according to what it should, that's good.
If not, then take the razor and put it in the fender, and turn the paper, and make II fendures or cost the paper as much as it needs.
And may the heads of the two bones at the two ends of the incision be set in place, and may they be shaped so that when they are assembled, it will resemble the figure of a letter that does not have "I griesche".
Then, that char, according to the amount of its cost, which is greater than the paper, then adjust the two uneven parts, and the cost of a linen thread.
Then, for the cures we have mentioned for mollifying medicines and tents, as long as they are healthy.
And if the disease comes from a cut or a wound or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a flat cut of the hair of the paper according to what is before. Then describe between the two shoulders of a tent, as I said.
Then describe between the two shoulders of a tent, as I said. And you must make the incision according to the shape of the disease, as it varies in shape, and the skilled masters can adjust everything to return it to its natural form.
And the patient himself, according to what is needed for the incision and excision in various positions.
When this suture is made by women in a certain way that the paper of it is soaked with white oil, and cannot move or make its natural cuts, then it is necessary that you touch the end of a razor with the wet paper, and hold it up;
and the stitches are removed as long as you cover what is inserted in the subcutaneous layer, which is not too thick nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the subcutaneous layer too much nor has the oil leaked out.
and make sure your incision, which you scrape of the one assembled, lightly, so that the paper re-forms according to its natural shape.
and it becomes healthy all that assembled, and never in the oil salty water, and raise it with sweet water, and with warmth.
Then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil smooth hair in a lot of glue. And afterwards, after the third day, use a warm poultice and things that are damp until it is healthy again.
There are two ways to cut the nail: It is nervous and resembles hard sandstone, and another that is not nervous but resembles dry moisture frozen, which when touched with fire and cooked with tongs, if it cannot be done;
and the other one resembles towards the great lurker, and grows little by little until it covers all the vision and all the light and the movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the surgeon places his finger in the wound, then he cuts the hairs. And soften the paper with your hand, then pick up the pincher with a small opening, and hold it at the end. Then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or sheephair, or beaverhair, and a strong thread. Then double the point of the needle with your finger, and pull the thread through the needle, and perforate all the needle, and tie it with one thread and hold it at the end, and scrape off all the hair from the edge of the needle that touches the prunele and the silk at the tip of the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the armor as subtle as possible and as small forces as possible, and leave the natural or alloyed char, so that by the incision does not come the corps of the tears habitually.
and no time has it been set in its place solely, and as for that, as we have said. Then the scorching, we have all the substance of it, and the form is like this:
And be careful that the substance does not touch the chipped tile and break it, and the pruning does not occur.
and then after the incision, a little oil is put into the wound, and dough is made from litargire, and it is left until the next day. Then the treatment of that which is to be done until it is healthy.
And if the finger is not very nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, this appearance of a finger of medicines is often treated many times.
and I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, if you work the oil of the woman, and take the light spumous substance according to this form: And dip the finger subtly, and if you see that it does not become soft and the reason is pressed, if you distill from your mouth the oil of colchicum made from litargire and red colchicum and seil broiet, and it stupefies the oil to the other part;
If nothing is against you in the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the abscess as soon as it is healthy, then continue the prick as before, as long as it is healthy.
Then continues the other evacuation according to this same work, as soon as it is all complete.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is dark in the oil at night due to great pain, and a part is affected but not all, that tears do not come;
then it distills into the oil that is redder, which is made of lividity.
The hairs of some men never turn red, and they prune them and roll them on papers and turn them into flowers, and seem like a rose of the dragon.
And the patient, if the surgeon places his head in your hand, then he manipulates the limbs, and all that is uncomfortable and inconvenient is adjusted to this, and support is given with strength.
Then adjust the first knot, and pull everything to the end, and make sure you do not cut the thread at the seam;
And let the incision be done with a sharp knife that we have mentioned in the incision of the toe, and with slight forces you can open it, if as the chapter shows after this chapter it is demonstrated;
And when the incision is completed and all the knots are open, if you use oil of silk or distilled red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and apply it with a cotton dipped in urine, so that it is sure to stop bleeding;
If it does not cause pain, and the flesh surrounds it, and you doubt the healing of the wound, then leave the oil and cure the healing of things that soothe the wound.
Then return to your work as soon as it is safe, and then make several cuts in the oil by this appearance.
But it is necessary that you soften the cure of every weak oil of the natural way. and from the accidental way of work, in the knife of iron.
and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that your limbs are calm in this work.
These are red veins that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye and blunt the oil for all time.
The first sentence translates to: "However, the first thing you notice is the oil, in its state, is false, and there is no other disease than the false one. However, the treatment is done in this way:
Instruct the patient to cut their hair short and even, then let the wounds heal according to their ability, and make the wounds subtle according to this form:
And let there be as many as one thousand degrees in one corpse according to this form:
Then you can reset the wounds subtly, and remove the remaining oil from the wounds as much as possible, until you see the wounds free of oil:
and make sure you do not weep the oil with the points of the spatula, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be as eager in your work so that you do not miss any stitches.
and when you have finished, if you distill the green and red oil to cool what is left of the bellows.
And if you cannot distill all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave some for as long as the pain is soothing and secure from gangrene, then resume according to this method until it is healthy again.
And it is the form of the forces:
It calls "arissati" fistulas:
When you cure with fire cautery and by using hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not completely healed, then it must be opened, and all the moisture that is in it must be drained, as long as the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and darkness, if all the instrument of this thing is in its form,
and is called "spraying," and it is made of firm wood, and it is cut like a knife if it is in the present form:
And put on the leg of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is set.
and do this once, then restore the leg with exfoliating medicines.
If the leg is swollen and hard, and the belly is also swollen, and it remains so for over XL years, and it does not heal or become infected, and no accidents occur, you should be reassured that it is healthy.
If not, then there is no other way but to bring the fistula back to the affected area according to this form: When the first dislocation occurs, it is necessary to realign the bone the second time using force and medicines called "agues," and if the patient feels pain according to this form, then the head of the shoulder should be fixed at three angles, and the force applied should be gentle as much as possible, just like you see here:
Then place the shoulder bone on the arm, and gently pull your hand away from the oil, then turn the entire forearm so that it pierces the bone and feels it through the flesh as if you are holding your hand on your neck;
And then restore the dry medicines as I have shown you, and when it is cooked and hardened, if it sticks to the neck, then it is the material for the shoulder; If there is a lighter thing on the patient.
When the wound is fully open and there is no sign of obstruction or inflammation in the urine, then you must examine the patient.
Then the nurse should perform a urinalysis using a sterile tube, without causing any harm. Then she should mix the urine with equal parts of oil and aloe vera, and incense and sarcolic acid, and then strain the mixture, and apply it to the belts and sheets.
And how the sheets are applied if you have enough sheets, double each one by four, and then place them on top of each other according to the amount that the wound has.
Then the strain forms due to the pressure of a hard bandage, and the ventouses resume sucking without feeling pain.
Then the ventouses are used and left on the strained part overnight, and if the strings loosen, then you must pull it tighter.
Then the string after the day and night, and if you see the oil repaired, it's done.
If not. If the burn returns and the cloths, the string, and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
Great disturbance of the eyeball When disruptions come in the eyelid, then it opens and comes out paper as small as a grain of resin, and it is difficult to see.
When you see this, the treatment is such that you insert an awl at the root of the part where the joint is dislocated, then insert another awl or a double-edged knife into the part of the arm that is injured. And then, using the first awl according to the position, leave the other awl alone.
Then, using the double-edged knife on the other part of the arm, draw out a piece of the urethra well, then remove the awl and place some soft oil on the wound.
And leave it as long as the edges of the urethra heal with the urethra, then treat the oil with things that are comfortable until the wound is healed.
For no time is the wound restrained by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healthy.
And if the hairs have a great appearance, then prick with the subtle spumace that comes from the oil, and remove the moisture and lower the hairs, and enter as soon as possible.
Then the hair is drawn as soon as it is healthy.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not more than a bow that is assembled in the oil, resembling sharp descending, and it is not sharp.
And the manner of appearance of the wound is that if you choose to sit the patient on the side and straight, then take the head between your two hands, and hold it as long as you see the bone coming to the end of your fingers. Then tighten it, and do not let it descend and make it untangled, and see the patient's things as he alone does.
And if it does not descend, be sure it is inflamed, and if the bone comes out of the wound, it is not straight as we have said.
If you sit the patient on your hands, then take the scalpel subtly and cut along the corneal edge I pot through the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the corneal bulb as long as the bone is in.
When it comes out, if it is distilled in the hot warm oil mixed with honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it is treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
of the cold water We have the appearances of waters in the division, and what must be done to perceive. if according to the health it is.
It is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands as firmly as possible, being in the light of the sun, and with the healthy and narrow oil.
Then place the paper of the oil in your left hand where the hairs are sparse, or in your right hand where the hairs are dense.
Then take in your right hand, the hairs that are longest, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, the hairs that are shortest.
Then place the tip of the instrument at the corona through the largest part of the hole in the oil bag at the least painful point of the arm, then use the instrument called "almagda" gently, and pull your hand as much as it pierces the oil bag, and feel that almagda enters the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda hole is at the end of the spice which is just above the prickle of the nail. and that is the head of the shoulder
if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal layer, and then place the instrument just where it is, then press on one way after another.
If the patient feels faint now, if they see the surgeon in front of them and the instrument before them.
after resting the small piece, and if the wound re-emerges on the second way, place the forceps with the instrument, and when it is secure and does not move, lightly twist your hand around a little bit.
and then place the wound with a piece of gummy thread, and lift some oil from it. Then pour the oil into the wound, either coarse or finely ground in oil and a large amount of oil, and mix it with the healthy oil.
Yes, and those who are ours, put on cloths with a large amount of oil.
And if the stone cannot enter the kidney through its hardness, because it has too many sharp hairs, then you must use the instrument called "alberit" which is in this form:
And only pierce the conjuncture, and do not push too hard, but make a small incision first, then pull out the arrowhead, as we have said.
And at the completion of the work, the patient feels pain in the shoulder, if it is dark in the leu.
And perform all movements, eat light foods, and do not move the head to the left or right, and adjust according to his natural position.
Then the patient stays in this house for a while, rests his eyes, and then shows me some things, and then he puts on his clothes according to the ninth hour.
1. and only that you do this in the care or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align it, because the swelling increases rapidly.
1. If abscesses occur, you must slide the oil in front of the ninth day, and address the one that relieves the abscess.
1. And when it is calmed, remove the eye and place it in a safe place for any day, and remain there in that dark house.
1. And then exit from the house little by little, and adapt to its case.
1. and be aware that no disciples should undergo this case. A group of people came from the Yrach region, informing us that in some areas it was practiced for centuries, but we have not seen any evidence of this in our land, nor have we ever read about it in ancient books. By chance, it is a new thing.
These are the appearances of the forms of cauterization, because those who do not know them.
and be of true cauerateur: And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles.
None are born or become different wounds, but there are some that seem to have scorpion's stings at their edges.
If it has such things or if there is an enhancement of color from flux, and if the color is good. In that case of these charms that are good and do not enhance, it is necessary that you hold the shoulder between your hands facing the sun.
In that case of these charms that are good and do not enhance, it is necessary that you hold the shoulder between your hands facing the sun. and move your nostrils, and wet the onion to those charms, and tear them off. then continue to hold the spumous substance of a part, until you feel that the char is completely soaked.
And if there is nothing else left that can be covered, then it is best to cover all the subtle and light substances lightly, so that nothing remains. and so as not to overcome you, abscess comes if the wound is like this;
and if it is malignant abscess, if you hasten and cauterize as much as possible without making them too dry and all bones, then grease or ointment or wine. If it does not work, and moisture comes suddenly, signs that it is healthy.
and if moisture does not pierce as it should, signs that it is healthy. If the bone is not crushed, and the string does not come out to cut:
then you must cut the end of the linen thread a little thick, and it should be strong enough for our hands, and it must be between each nail or less. And place the patient's head on the pillow so that it does not move, and support it with a damp cloth as much as possible, and cover it with a cold cloth as it comes out of the mouth.
And many times they make the child cry in school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it.
Then hold the forehead that comes from the pillow with one hand, and the other forehead that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and wipe it after the other in order to clean it as we do with our hands.
Do this as long as you see that the child's diaper has become soiled, then take off the diaper, clean the child, and apply Egyptian ointment to the child, and put it back on the pillow in the same way.
I will perform this operation on at least three or more areas, as long as the incisions do not corrode any further areas of the char.
Then I will insert or leave a needle in any uncut areas as long as it is safe, and if it is necessary to use medicinal herbs, then do so.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as we distill the oils and medicines or needles.
And it should be made of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a needle, and it is led in the same way.
And if you see, if I make a needle closed, and it is the plains that are used to purge the head.
and hold the head of the shoulder to keep it steady when heating the oil or any liquid.
And of the char for the head.
Many times the head of the shoulder is not a disease called "telul", and it grows and becomes large, until it is seen as something to be looked at.
And that's why you need to cut it at the beginning, and then put the oste on fire, and then use the cauterization or burning medicine.
And if you delay it as much as it is large, then if it is hard, of a dark color, and poor sense:
if you do not cut it with iron because it is an enchanted wound, because if you cut it once, there is always great pain for the patient;
And if the patient is in pain, not due to shock but from actual harm, you can see that it can be controlled if the surgeon is skilled and takes care not to cause further harm, and cure the limb of things that are loose and restrained.
Said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and is only in some people.
Therefore, it is necessary to consider this when there is no other option, if you look at whether the wound is fresh at all times with its blood. and then stitch the lips together with a stitch, and treat them as soon as they are healthy.
And if the lips are already split on both sides, it is necessary to scrape all the parts of them as they heal, and then stitch the lips together with a stitch, and pull them, and sprinkle them with dragon's blood powder, and anoint with incense. When the swelling subsides, place a piece of plaster or another ointment plaster on the affected area, and leave it until it is dry, then apply the ointment when it is dry.
The method of sewing if you assemble the solution: Or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal sewing; Or by thread, as I have told you;
2. of the abscesses of the lips
In the hands of skilled surgeons, the lips of abscesses are often hard and look like grains of sand, and they can be larger or smaller;
Therefore, you must turn the lips of the abscesses, and cut them on each side, and take them out with tweezers and close each part;
Then use the hand after incising the blisters, as long as they are not inflamed.
And then wash the hand, and cure the hand with dry things until it is healthy.
Many times, on the old cheeks, which they call "alabaster";
if you must hold it with your nails, and the cord at its root, and let go of the bow or the wound.
Then put on the hand blisters, or other restricting and drying powders.
And if that cheek returns after the incision, and many times comes back, if the cord second time, and cauterize: If there is no return after the cauterization;
No times are assembled at the head of the teeth, the teeth are inserted between the lips, gums that are ugly and sharp. And no time is the black and yellow tooth, until corruption comes to the lip, and it becomes the tooth.
If it comes to your notice that you must hold the patient between your hands, and the head is in your holy place, and you pull out the teeth or gums visible, as long as it does not cost anything. and I make of black and green, and of yellow and other stains, as much as they are needed.
and if one has this at the first reason, it is good. if not, then repeat the second part and the third, as long as you have everything.
and you should know that the teeth have the ability to take on various forms of wisdom teeth, according to what the one who demonstrates it does, because the raspers used to remove teeth have other shapes than those used between the teeth. and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the patient's tooth pain that you postpone it as much as possible and as long as you can, because it should not be done quickly. because it is a substance high in moisture, therefore there is no excuse to delay.
When the patient is forced to take medicine, then you must be sure of the tooth's pain. Many times the pain of the patient's tooth has passed, and make sure it is not damaged, and treat the root of the tooth. and the patient will not return to pain until the tooth is extracted, as long as it is not extracted, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones.
When you are sure that the tooth is decaying, if it comes to removing the entire tooth, scrape it thoroughly with a sharp tool to protect the gum of all parts.
Then the mouse has its way with you or it pricks you slightly at first and then firmly, until they are well set, then it affirms the nails. and let the shoulder of the patient be between your hands, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted sensibly with forceps, and if it does not slip, then take none of these strings and pull lightly on each part, and move it as you have done first.
And if the den is perceived and mangled, then you must fill it with cloths, either the wounds are. and if the extraction is made subtly with nails, so that it does not break in the extraction.
And it is wise to over the thigh to remove the tooth.
And be very careful not to break the tooth, and there will remain a part, and it will return to the patient due to the malice of the root and greater pain in the first.
And make sure that you do not make mistakes like those that the ignorant healers make, who through their haste and their recklessness never break a bone, and do not injure it except for what we have counted.
but bring it about never once by the pressure of that great disease, either by the roots which they press, or by the bone which they break, as we often want.
And when the gum is dry, wash the part with wine or vinegar and soap.
And if they become inflamed and are lost, which often happens, use the powder of green glass.
If this does not work, then the patient should have the fire cautery.
The forms of the wisdom teeth, if they do not protrude at first, are long and thick, and will not double in size until you pull the tooth;
And these are the forms: And they should be thick members if they do not break when ground, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be teeth that can be held tightly.
of the root of the teeth When the root of the tooth is pulled, if you can put it in the socket for one or two hours, until it is smooth, then the tines called "alveoli" will be loosened, and the gums will look like they are well-groomed;
And these are the forms:
And if the roots do not come out of all these thorns, then it comes that you pull out the whole branch at the root, and put in the instrument called "athali", which is known as a "palinch", and its shape is like this:
And so be it, and let it be large if it does not break through, and if its root jumps by this, it is well.
If that does not happen, then help from all the stimulants and the shapes will come after:
And if you use it with two rains, then the shape is like this: and other instruments that are before in the reason of the teeth, and with this instrument which seems like great thorns, whose shape is like this:
And let the stimulants be large enough that it cannot break, and may have a strong smell of stimulants: and other stimulants, which are not small:
And the master tools are used by themselves, according to what their uses and the disease they demonstrate, because there are many diseases or the ancients did not teach different instruments for the diversity of bones and the horseshoe does not break at the end or other bones, or it pours out, if you seek as stimulants that I have said, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
And let them be large and well-held by holding the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and rest.
Then restore the body to the appropriate medicines, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument.
When the tooth appears to not fit according to the natural body, and its form is misshapen, and at the same time in women with multiple teeth, if it comes out after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and it cannot be soaked or softened:
then the root. If it is bitten by a tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like the small tooth, and it should be made of iron, not sharp:
And quickly and quickly in the hands, for the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears like this, then you can tie it with a part of the rope as this is formed:
and it is used as the claw of the fish we make for the eagles;
and in the claw of the tooth, it is very lightly held in the hands, so that it does not move until it falls;
then the end is flat for any rasping, and if the teeth are too sharp and they cut the tongue, then it is necessary to smooth the file as much as possible, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth in front of the gum, or by percussion or by listening, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you treat them with restraining medicines, and it does not help.
If they are restrained with a gold thread, because the silver threads turn green and blister, but the gold does not move.
and that the silver threads are neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
and if you see the teeth erupting, then take the thread and pull double between the two healthy teeth, then put the threads between the crooked teeth, as long as you see progress in the healthy tooth on the other side. Then continues the covering just where you left off, and gently and wisely draw back your hand, so it does not move at all.
and keep your finger at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Then fit the crowns onto the pins, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth and the one that is being fixed, and make sure it does not touch the tongue.
And then leave it as wide as possible, and if it does not hold, or the pins come out, then use another pin.
If it does not hold and serves its purpose, and is the shape of the teeth and the placement of the two healthy second molars and the two third molars, as you see:
And when the tooth is set, if it is put back in its place, as we have said.
and does not move a single hair that is not sharp and painful, and never takes the form of a bone of a sheep, and it is put back in its place or where it belongs, and it is tightened as we have said, and holds firmly, and remains so as we have described.
Never has a case been seen where the tongue or its flesh comes out, which is not known. or by chance of wounding;
and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and put their head in your mouth, and hold the tongue gently.
Then pull the nervous and large ligament as far as possible, until the tongue is free from its place, and if it does not return or out, and that is a serious wound, if it bites the uncinate and pulls wide the nearby ligament;
and make sure the tooth does not cut too deeply, because the artery that is there is very small;
and when you have finished, if the lip is red and swollen, or cold, then place the tongue in a cloth tent;
and the salve should be applied to the patient's lips every night, so that the wound can heal;
And if the dislocation occurs, then place the arm in a splint. And if it does not heal, then use a slow-healing cauterization on the cauterization, which is good for this. Then apply another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
And if you see that the wound is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel pain, if it does not hurt, because it is a gangrene.
And if the patient is declining into chlorosis and there is moisture, if it gushes blood, and they apply a subtle sponge, and they extract from one part and another; And if you do not want to harm your patient, then use hot iron wires as soon as they are burned, and then return to your work as soon as you have finished everything.
Then lift the leg of silk and thread, and treat other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
gums of the chin No time comes when the gums called "godath" are called "godath," and they are properly called "hamanders." When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, then keep them.
If it is a small, hard aphthous ulcer of dark color, and you do not touch it with any iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, and not touched with iron at all, then for the evacuation of blood. But let it remain until it is dead, and therefore you will leave it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is watery-colored and the root is fine, and you have prepared the instrument well, but first see if the abscess pus is reduced and calmed.
Then place the patient in front of the sun, and their head should be in your hand, and they open their mouth and grip the tongue between their hands, and press the tongue against all the instruments, as you will see the form.
Et soit d'argent ou d'arain subtil aussi comme uns coutelz:
Cant tu press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the aposteme, if take the pin and the hook in the amber, and the tail will be further than you please.
And try nothing with the threads, then the crown of the instrument, of which it seems some forces are. And the head is all sharp, and one place to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
If you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then the form is like this: And it is cutting from one side and the other, and named.
When you have grasped one of the hamstrings, if you grasp the other in the same manner, and after incising it with a hot, sharp knife, and cutting along the tendon, and if blood comes out, if the tendon is seared, or gallstones are cooked, or stones from the gallbladder are removed, and similar things, as long as it is not infected. Then the treatment continues as long as it is healthy.
And never do other abscesses appear in the throat than the two hamstrings, if they are cut out like the two hamstrings.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the mouth, which is to say the abscess is of small sensation.
and had I closed almost all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the clogged duct, and could not drink or eat, and died if she lingered for one or two days.
The abscess was so large that it required two incisions through the two holes.
I therefore had to perform a tracheotomy, then the patient became worse, and there was a large portion of bowel exposed.
then another part was removed from the other side of the neck, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue.
After filing the gallstone in these abscesses, and cutting off a part, and it does not become larger than a drop of blood. and the woman's guide was torn from her mouth, and began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop trimming this abscess for a long time.
and the abscess dislocated further, and filled the joint I had opened, as much as it could hold, without causing great pain.
Therefore, I operated on it and burned the joint of the jaw: and it did not grow further.
I will begin from these parts, and I alone shall do this for you, God willing.
Of the urethra
When the finger is pulled towards the nail, and it is long and thin, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it is too thin and round, it is called "nail".
When the wound is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit, you will see that the incision is calmed and it is subtle, so you can cut it.
And the one that is round and assembled and is not long. And if it is bloody or colored or black, you must throw away the incision of it. For there is great danger for the patient.
It is therefore necessary, as you see, according to the method I have said, of the belly and length, that you set the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have made memorable before. Then cut the gallbladder in the urethra, and the tail off, and the cover it with the two incisions I mentioned in the incision of the two amandras.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is over the natural termination.
For if you cover more, you will grieve to the voice and speech.
After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two thumbs, and treat it as soon as it is healed.
And if the patient suffers from pain in the other side, then you should use an engine for the fire cautery of the other side.
And the manner of cauterization is sharp when it is hot. And the patient places his head on your shoulder, and then presses the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the cauterization chapter of this book, and confines it with live coals, if it is not too thick or too clear; and by using the thickness of this instrument, the form is:
And if the head has a hair or puts in the medicine, like the hairs of a comb, and places the instrument on all the medicine under the eye;
and the patient is gasping at their cost, if the saliva and foam come from the medicine given, if it does not descend to the throat and jaw,
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the vein, the amount of the one hour's worth of medicine, as long as you see it is clear and the medicine's bitterness is soothing.
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around no instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and dip the instrument in all the cotton in the case, as long as the cotton is damp at the vein.
And I do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then it leaves it to dry, and I wait four or five days.
And if you have experience in re-cauterizing medical wounds, if it is necessary to do so again, and after the cauterization, wrap the end of the urethra with rags, and clean what is outside of the medical wound.
And if you have a sore throat, and use gargles as needed.
This treatment is safer than incision, only the cauterization.
If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take a lamp, and put in it incense, oak leaves, rosemary, chamomile, and any other herbs you have, and assemble them all or none of them into one pot, and let it boil;
And it can be well glued with strong earth, and it has an instrument made according to this manner: And it can be of silver or gold, and some of the ends are inserted in the mouth of the patient as much as possible until the vapor rises through the canal, until the canal is hardened;
After the wound has often healed, until the canal is dry and keep in mind that you should not do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, because many things come afterwards; and only do this when the onset of the abscess has occurred;
And if this instrument is not present, then take a catheter and put it in the patient's mouth, if the mouth is too dry. For the catheter of urine does not burn the mouth, and it is a good cure together with salvation.
Many times it has happened in the throat of the gargle or spine of fish, or nothing at all.
Therefore, if you must try what you see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing.
And if it does not open you, then you must make the patient vomit, unless the meat is cooked in the stomach. If by chance the thing is accomplished through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a sponge piece, or a navel piece, or a lactice root, or a piece of dry bread; and holds the sponge by the end and then glues it; and when it reaches the shoulder, if it will, and then draws forth a string;
and if it does not come from what we have said, then use the instrument of plucking according to this form:
And let the hooks be placed at the head if it can more gently enter into the mouth, and have the head raised above; And you must not touch the epigastrium, for all will avoid it, and do not force the bones.
And it is best that the patient forces the instrument, because they know what to do. If the force is applied correctly, or it is pulled evenly on all the instrument, until it is fully applied.
2. of the throat's gaping
No time is there for medicine without the hands, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines. And when that does not help, look at the patient's face in the sun, then press the patient's tongue to the instrument I have given you.
If you see the bone, if it has all been cut with a sharp knife, or if there are small thorns that are worth this.
If it is not worth anything, then take a small hair, and pull it out of the patient's throat, then pull or cut off the hair with fire, and do this often. And the patient's throat is covered with sweat all day long.
Then fill me with cold water, and operate on the mouth, and the throat feels as if it is being swallowed, and it moves often with my hand. and if the tongue feels the cold water, then it is.
And if it does not feel as we have said, if the patient smokes tobacco, with the instrument I mentioned in the uvea fumigation;
do this many times, because it will feel ticklish.
And the manner of the fumigation if you press on it whether you can or if it has charcoal inside, and it is covered with a covering sheet in the environment, and in that place is the head of the instrument;
Then the fumigation drips on you, and the patient places the head of the chain in their mouth, closes their mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but goes to the wound.
And now the wound hurts, and if it does not stop, then the fumigation is repeated many times.
And the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and acidic things, and does not drink water.
And therefore it is necessary to follow this government.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it can be seen, resembles stingray spines that can enter the mouth. And it seems like the beak of a surgeon, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot hold.
The forms of similitudes of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes after each other in this book, and they are diverse in piercing and size.
And it is in two ways that one is itself in its similitude, and because it holds moisture.
And the second method if by the bones or if they are in place.
For the head of the tumor is different from that of the foundation, and the head of the tumor in the flesh is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if in abscesses we do not have to pierce much, as long as the bowel is dead according to its completion.
If it happens that they believe they can perceive when they are not, and do not die according to their accomplishment, as if they were amputations of joints.
For when the tumor comes from delightful joints, and it is left as long as it is raw, by chance if the ligament and nerve are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
If the amputation is of the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until the member is dead, it will harm the principal member.
If it is of the foundation, then if you do not kill it immediately, it will be harmed.
And it is only necessary to perforate the amputation believed to be accomplished with digestion, as if the principal member were harmed, that it would not be cut off, and it would be long-lasting, and a fistula would be formed. And cannot be cured in a short time.
And it is necessary that you observe the opening of the aperture caused by the abscess, which is inflamed according to its completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the fever subsides, and the alleviation of pain and burning, and the debate and agony of the inflammation of the abscess, and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you cut around the aperture of the abscess, and where it has opened.
And if the opening is long and thin, and the abscess is in the hands or fingers, or in the joints and arteries, and throughout these areas without any clotting. In those places, according to the member.
And when abscesses are in the body, if it is necessary to leave the puncture until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
For if you do not love this beforehand, when the blood comes from him, and it is painful to defecate; and by chance harden the lips and make them more like him.
And if no abscess is found according to the size of the corse, according to what the member can endure.
And it is necessary that you cut out the small abscesses, the large abscesses. and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess.
and if in such abscesses or it is necessary to cut out the head, and close it. When I have become as hard as cheese, and is dry, then it is necessary to make it like the bubbles.
If it is of those that are cut at three angles, and if it is of those that are coped as the flint of fire, like the throats of the angers.
And if it is of those that one makes a round cut, and other sizes and appearances are coped.
Those who have no head, like superficial wounds that require you to cut it plainly.
And when the wound is large, and it has hooked great bowels, and you cut it, if you do not pull out all the bowels at once, but pull out a part. Then the wound stupifies and jumps to the other side, then you pull nothing else. 1. Do this many times with great effort until the bow is entirely broken.
2. If the patient's willpower is weak, whether due to women, young girls, or old age, they will not be able to endure great pain. 2. If you have never seen the end of the bowel, and by chance the patient dies, you will not know it.
3. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and if you have discovered your abscess, if the wound is small, look at how small the abscess wound is. 4. And if it is a plain size, then use linen or cotton threads to tie it tightly. 5. And if there are large abscesses and they have ruptured, then tie each one with a thread so that one does not touch the other.
And if you have managed to remove a part of the hide, and it is well-groomed, then it is recommended that you fill the gap with expensive fabric or rough linen thread, and sew it tightly.
Then, the bone, and the treatment of scarring as long as it is healthy.
When the dislocation occurs in your shoulder, if it is cold and wet, and there is much pain, and you should gently move the limb, and put it back in its place many times.
And if the patient persists in bleeding, and is under proper care and treatment, and the powders I mentioned in my hands are found in this book, and if it is not enough, then you should use warm compresses and dampened cloths with wine and olive oil.
And if it is in this way, and the patient's condition worsens, so that you must use drapes that are moistened with water and oil, or wine and oil vinegar, just as we have said, then...
And then remove the suture and the wound, if necessary, as soon as it is healthy.
And this is necessary to understand in all treatments of sutures:
Or have I said anything about going before the treatment of sutures and this chapter?
When the head comes to abscesses, and they are like us, as if it were a grapevine, and there are many similarities.
It is thick and tough or it has moisture as well as flesh;
And if there are those who are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt that the patient will not bleed, then it does not matter.
And the operations of the cutting if you are skilled with all the instruments called "enterostomy", whether the form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make it longer by using certain methods.
And when moisture is visible, if it does not cause pain to shave the hair that contains the moisture, then it will move back as soon as it is left alone.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present. if not, use vinegar and salt, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day. and keep the part that is more painful at night.
And then resume the cloth, as before, on the second day, and the wound, as long as you see that it does not hurt much at night.
Then treat the wound with ointment as convenient, as long as it is healthy.
And if the abscess holds fat, if it follows this form, it will be long. And if you gnaw your bones, and scrape off all parts, and apply all your care to draw out the pus or it will.
And if the artery is made against you, as I said after.
2. And if the dislocation is severe, I will cut and treat it as I have said.
3. And the cutting of the dislocation is made on the severe part, if it is more flexible, because there is not much blood. If there is no moisture in any of these incisions or wounds, and these were made by an old woman or myself;
and found the incision to be similar to a sharp, rough, and bloody piercing, which could not be cut; and if we had not made any, we would have made a wound similar to a piercing.
In other incisions coming or made, let those that come from the children and roots of the ears be opened as far as possible at the dependent part of the ear, to relieve the pain.
and they cure as they can.
Often, the abscess comes to the collarbone, and loosen the clamps, and the wounds, and never once do they come from another part or cut, and they are mutilated, and are misaligned with one another.
And every scrofula is properly located on its side, as the wound and abscess of the chief are, as we have said. and the appearances of these scrofulas are numerous.
and the appearances of these scrofulas are numerous. There are those that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
in that which you see in good position at the wound, and is similar in color to the color of the heart, and is uniform in every part and is not like nerves of the arm or the conduit, and is not like a tumor;
if you can cover it with plasters, and scorch it in every part, and the lips of the knee as the knuckles, if you have mastery of it, as we have said in abscesses of the chief;
1. And the patient should rest and rest, and be sure not to damage the nerve or vein, and not to stretch too much, as the hands may swell, and not look too early, as you may damage what you should not.
2. And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol or some powders that adhere to the wound in the wound; 3. and let it stay until the inflammation is pacified, and the wound is softened, and it begins to fall off.
4. And if the uncircumcised part is swollen, then return to your own chapter as soon as you have completed it.
Then if you see a few small pimples on your index finger, such as nails and thumb.
And if the pimple has a deep root, then you must only cut out that pimple with a strong double thread, but do not pull it; it will cause no harm.
Then use the wound of fine cotton, then apply Egyptian ointment, and the cure.
If you cover the entire wound, if you manage to gather the two lips of the wound, and hold them now, then there will be no excess as the wound is not too large. If you understand how to cover the root of it, and to treat it further, and hold it as we have said.
If you understand how to cover the root of it, and to treat it further, and hold it as we have said. Those pimples that are superfluous, pierce them or let them heal;
And pierce them like the one mentioned earlier, depending on the size, then apply ointments and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is being corrupted. And when the wound is well healed, if the cure of cauterization is done correctly, then it will be healthy.
The ancients spoke of the size of the throat. But I have never seen such in our world, and it is their scripture according to their speech.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cut of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided. And it is not possible to help with this, because all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those who have the throat swollen in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the ears.
When the disease is in the hollow of the thigh, it is necessary to cover the epigastrium to avoid the destruction that comes from dislocation.
It is necessary, therefore, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it in three or four passes, with a small cut that traverses the two circles, or according to the quantity of the cut, not in the cartilage;
and they say that it is possible to cut the epigastrium when it has no cartilage, and the wounds are long enough;
And if the masters are poor, then it is necessary to extend the neck skin to the entire chin, then cut the ear as far as it reaches the chin; and avoid the veins, if you see nothing, and then cut along the line of the facial muscle, as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the swelling of the cheek that jumps out due to the fractured bone and by the failure of the voice.
and leaves the wound open for a piece.
And when the hour has passed and there is doubt of the dislocation, assemble the two lips of the wound as far as possible, and close it all so that you can feel the cartilage.
then administer medications that make the patient sleepy, until they are asleep.
Albucasim does not know how to do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of blood is noticeable. Because the shoulder is dislocated due to the patient's weakness, and they cannot move it, and they breathe through the wound, and it should be kept alive.
And because the ancients advised leaving the wound open as long as the disease had not passed, and it had passed in three days or four. Therefore, they ordered to suture and treat the wound as soon as it was cured.
and I will tell you what I see. I see a maiden who is being cut, and she has a piece of fabric in her throat, and part of her dress is torn.
I was called to cure him, and I found him already dead.
I discover the wound, and find the blood that came from it, and I am well that she had not much vein nor led only the gorge, and the blood came from this wound.
I rushed to his aid, found the wound, and cured it as soon as it was healed.
and did not reach the lady's side until she was angry of voice, and returned later to her disposition.
because I said that in the tailoring of the epigastric muscle there was no pain.
These hernias are called "thoracic hernia" and are large in color like a beefsteak, and are more common in women.
and occur in two ways: The nature of this procedure is to reduce dislocation, which can occur due to accidents.
However, a natural remedy does not exist for this procedure.
The accident can occur in two ways: either it is similar to a large wound, or it is similar to an abscess that comes from the artery. And there is fear, and it is necessary to overcome it, and it can only be done with courage in the small incision, and one must search throughout the introducer. If you also have large hands and cannot do it, then the operation is like cutting our wounds, and if it is done, it must be done throughout its entire course, if there are no problems. 1. And it pierces completely, and the cure is done as it should be, as long as it is perfectly healthy.
1. There are many ways of us, of which I will tell all the appearances.
1. And it is necessary that I die all the difference that is between whelp and issue.
1. I say that issue is calm and feverish, as long as the ebullitions have passed and is accomplished the porridge; 1. But the fever and the calmness rest.
1. With the newborn there is no calm or fever or pain, and it contains I sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the dove's neck, and becomes thus like a wisp, and becomes large.
They are classified into two types, either rough or smooth, or wet or dry, and of different colors as I have mentioned in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you first examine and search for the entangled one in all the instruments called "entangler", according to what its form brings or chapter that comes after.
The manner of incising the abscess of the gums is to prick it more with a damp finger than with a dry one, and turn the two points frequently until you feel that the pus has ceased to flow, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the instrument and hold it steady as you force it.
If the abscess is moist, it is cut according to its color, just as we do with other abscesses.
And afterwards, if there is no moisture, the head comes out fat, so make it into a cross, and take it with pliers, and gently scrape each part and warm the coat where you should lay it smoothly with the nail.
And if you do not scrape it smoothly, then lay it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
For if nothing comes out, it will return to us many times.
And if it demands a poc, and does not grieve you, then use the wound of some corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and put calming remedies on the swelling, and cure other cures as long as it is healthy.
And if it is large, if the two lips of the wound are clean, and the care of those who enjoin charge.
And if the vein is tense or other, and you haste, and use the leather of vitriol glove, and leave it for II or III days, until the wound pours pus, and rest the heat of the sore; Then return to the copper that is needed most.
See these forms of the entangled stones, and there are three kinds: Large and moist and small;
And there are three kinds of stones that are called "alabar" and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: Grant, moign, and petit, by encircling the fistules' apostilles.
And they are like the eyes of the eagles whose beaks are counted, and are of gold or silver or copper, and are more expensive than yellow ones, and are better at avoiding black holes for encircling the fistules' apostilles.
And they are in three ways: Great, medium, and small, according to the size of the abscesses.
The shapes of the tumors are of many appearances, as you see here:
If there are birds with two holes of three kinds.
And if the birds have three beaks, and they are of three kinds.
And if the birds have two beaks, and birds with one beak, and they are of three kinds.
And this is necessary for their neck.
The head of these is made so sharp that it can cut through anything, even the skin, because it cannot touch the vein or the nerve.
And the introits of these are replaced with handgrips, so that the patient does not lose consciousness at the opening of the abscesses.
1. And there are three ways to it: 2. grand, small, and misplaced, as you see;
3. but only in the shoulder and arm, as with legs and arms, and hands, and fingers, and toes, and in similar parts;
4. and no other instrument is ever used that resembles forceps, according to this form, but one is inserted in the wound; And he places it on no occasion in the shoulder that is strong and resistant to wounds and arteries, and it never returns according to this great form:
5. and no other men's hands ever swell when they are trying to correct the wound, as if they were female hands;
6. and are swollen and inflamed, and those who see them cured think that it is according to this form of this line from .b. to .g.; Then scorch the fat, and employ the wound with medicinal burning char, then stitch the two lips of the wound together, and dress it as it is healing.
And if it is crooked, and is made straight by its growth, as it is with women, if they are made in two pieces, by the resemblance of their limbs. If one is holding onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, then this line .b. to the line .g. Then scorch the leather between the two lips, and remove the fat, and do what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healing.
If the patient is not healthy, or if the incision is not fully healed, because the therapist does not rest, or due to the reabsorption of blood, it comes that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and leave it until the dressing and grease have been removed, then treat it when it is healthy.
These apostles that come out of the hooves are ways for scrofulous hard nodules or callosities to form, and they contain moisture.
Therefore, which contain moisture, must be cut according to this form, along the line .b. and .g. And when all the bowels within the abscess are out, if you employ a piece of clean linen, leave it there for another day, then take out all the linen and treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles scabs, then it is like we have said in the thorns, and if the wound is deep, then it should be cauterized as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin is sutured as it should be, if there are many hematomas and the vein becomes inflamed and infected.
and if the patient complains of pain when it is due to the artery, then it is cut; if there are hematomas, they should be removed. And when you feel your pain, if you feel strain.
And if it is due to the vein, if we cut it loose.
And it is madness to cut this abscess, and at the same time when the screws and nails are removed and the skin is torn and out of place, and it is infected with other pustules. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who has been pierced by arrows made of hair, which have been passed through the skin.
Then, apply the size of the nails, and remove the arrow from the feathers, as soon as it is discovered.
Then insert a needle, and feel on the other side, and tighten the artery with a thread doubled into two, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries in the temples.
Then do not insert the bone that is between the two fingers of an introducer as long as it does not cause pain, and if it does cause pain, release the abscess.
Then proceed with the treatment as soon as they are healed. Then treat this wound as it becomes healthy.
And if the abscess is of the size of the vein, then it is necessary to clean it with your hand the amount you have taken from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle into the bone you hold in your hand and feel, and if there is a thread doubled, then take it off the other side. Then tie the suture, as I have said, or one of the two ends of the thread to the corresponding bone.
And if you doubt that the threads will not fray, if another needle is used throughout the entire thread from the first needle to the end of the suture at the incision, and the threads are tightened in four places;
Then tighten the suture as much as possible, then tighten the excess and leave what is tied;
Then apply the linen cloth wet with wine and oil, then treat the wounds as needed until it is healthy;
For abscesses of the nerves come in the artery and vein, they come when the nerves are too tight or due to too much work, and similar things happen.
And this often happens with assistants and you must do it in all joints, and it is a great pain, and its color seems like the color of a corpse, and it is in more positions with pain.
And when it is tightened, it forms, if it feels great pain, and it is not in a state of being dead, but rather it is in a state of being alive;
And it is very still in all parts, and it does not go before or after, nor does it come or go, and the one who is in joints cannot be made by force; by chance it may contract. And the one who is at the head or front, makes the leather at the spatumile.
And the one who is at the head or front, makes the leather at the spatumile. If the head is small, then it is held with nails, and the cradle at its root.
And if it is large, then it spends in the hip, and burns it, then the bone and assembles the wound to the seam, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
No time comes in the womb and does not affect another part of the body, and it is a disease called "funk" by its appearance, and it affects the root subtly, and the head is large.
And in some it is small and in others large.
And I have seen one who had it in his belly and another whose belly was more similar to "funks" than anything else, and it had no difference, and they were white, had thin roots, and were trimmed, and decayed due to moisture.
I found them and discovered in one there were 18 ounces, and in the other 6. The incisions should be made if you observe that the patient's skin is moist, and the color of the artel is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root. If the patient copes with the spatula large, and they are in your presence, perform the fire cautery.
If the patient copes with the spatula large, and they are in your presence, perform the fire cautery. For the tailor often comes too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not want to, then you must cauterize.
And if you see the patient sweating and fearing the incision with fire, then take one finger of well-made thread, and around the artel as we have said, and leave it there.
Then comes the restraint, and do not stop straining the thread until it matches the armor, and then feel its strength.
And if the roots are large, then it is not painful to the belly, but it does not hurt much, then cauterize so that it does not sprout.
Then treat the wound, and do not hurt the thigh that is of a foxy color and poor sense and thin milk.
For these are infected gums, and I will treat the sore here after.
When the boudoir is full If the appearance of the bile comes from cauterization of a wound or a scar from a razer, and it is under the belly and in some parts of the bile, as it does in other ways, or of sanc which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of ventositeit.
And if it is due to the rupture of the facial nerve and the exit of the bruit, if the color of the aphasia resembles the color of the heart, and it is light and causes pain in various places. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more complex, and when pressed on both sides, it returns, and by chance it may be stretched, and enlarges the opening to the bath and with great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is light and opens well when you press it with your hand; do not constrain it.
And if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs, the abscess is large and hard, and it oozes in a certain quantity. And if it is due to varix, it is wet when you touch it, and the vein or artery appears to be of blood color.
And if it is due to varix, it is wet when you touch it, and the vein or artery appears to be of blood color. If it is necessary to leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
When the appearance is from the intestine or the bowels, if it comes that you command the patient to touch his hair, and it is extended all around, then sign to cut through the entire bowel. Then he is commanded to cut within your hands, then goes through the limb that you have signed at all the joints, then half of the abscess is removed at the end of the great thigh. Then it is cut through with a strong thread, or with a sturdy cord, and it should be cleaned with a strong alcohol.
Then the half of the abscess extended on the thread is worked, and you should indicate your dose, and it will indicate the intestine. If you take too much of it, if it leaves, and cause inflammation in the intestines of the stomach.
And if you take too much dung, if it is taken into the uterus, and cuts off the excess.
And if the artery is made to go against, or the vein, if it goes in the wrong way, then return to your work and take two hooks, and cut off the two legs that you have done as if you were doing it.
Then squeeze the abscess with four fingers on the hooks, and if you see, that the hooks are in the wound, leave the leg as much as it hurts, and the dead man will die by himself. If you catch it when it is subtle and slippery, then the cure of what must be done, and close the abscess as we have said.
If you catch it when it is subtle and slippery, then the cure of what must be done, and close the abscess as we have said. And draw out the blood or mucus that you see, then treat the shoulder with what covers it, and dry the shoulder.
The translation of "dou chancre We have said in the division that the appearances of a chancre are like this, and we know how to cover it with medicines, and we know how to cure it with iron.
And say the chancre is in the breast, and great caution in its cure, and tell the old man that when chancres are in the shoulder or it can be rated as if a chancre in the mammary glands, and in the nipples, and in appearances like this, and it must be done entirely when it is at the beginning.
no one has ever been cured before me.
And the overage, when it is in the body or can be opened, as we have said, is that you never cleanse the malady with black cola.
then it becomes healthier if it has manifest fullness, then open the malady and draw out the blood to make the overage.
then your shoulder or chancre becomes soft and all the hair falls out, and the bone of all parts leaves nothing behind.
and leave the blood as it is, and press hard on the wound in your hand or on anything else, and if they dislocate the blood will be against the incision of the artery or vein, if cauterized as much as they are unstitched. then the treatment of another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "de ydropisie We have said in the division that the appearances of dropsy are, and how the assembly of fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one should not touch iron in these two appearances: it is to know, tympanitis and yposarchy, for it is a deadly thing;
therefore, when you treat this appearance of ydropsies called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you look at whether the drugs are weak, or if it is another disease than ydropsies, if as all other solutions of the belly and similar things; if one does not touch iron, because it is doubtful;
and if you see the drug of strong vitality, and it has no other disease than ydropsies alone, and it is not too young or too old, then you should over: 1. Guide the patient's shoulder correctly in your hands, and gently press the abdomen towards the base of the spine, then take the spatula in this form: And now, let us proceed to the second part. 2. And if it does not come out easily, do not force it, as it may enter the intestine when it is removed, and it cannot be pulled out:
3. Then look to see if the dislocation is towards the intestines: 4. If it is necessary to remove it from the anus, then straighten it up from the third finger: 5. And if the dislocation is due to a disease of the liver, then your finger should be inserted at the left anus:
And if it is by the muscle, if it is on the right side, and there is no need for the surgeon to cut through the fascia that the superfluities flow into that weak part of the limb.
Then pierce all the leather with the instrument, and the bone, and gently press your hand all along the skin between the leather and the fascia as if you were scraping out a small nail or an entrail.
Then pierce the fascia as far as the skin does not reach the bone, and it is the angle of the joint that this instrument forms. And it resembles a silver needle, and is light or featherweight, and in its part nearest the tip, there is a small pore. and may cost on another part, three pores. and two other parts, and one more.
And it is cut like a pen, and its shape is the size of the incision that scribes the pen.
At the head of the tool, it is sharp, and when it touches the edge, it now descends with the instrument.
If you see more than it is necessary in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or if he loses consciousness, or approaches death.
But according to the amount of her virtue, and according to what the dispositions of her virtue mean for the maiden, and her will.
Then draw the instrument and hold the flame, and it is held now by the heat that stops the pustule that is under the scar, according to what I have spoken, that you must do according to this manner.
Then continue the instrument the next day, if you see the maiden suffering from this, and apply a small amount of flame.
Do this every day, and keep it away from the fire as much as possible, but a little flame.
If you doubt the patient's condition, and they lack strength, then the care of the cemetery or sandbath is needed, and this can be done by wetting or bathing and in the sun, and it will become flushed. And the care of desiccating medicines is needed as soon as it is healthy, and cauterization is done on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the abscess, as I have said before.
No child is ever born without having a pustule on the bowstring, or if the pustule is small, or it is not present in his leg.
If the dislocation is so great that it cannot be perceived with any pin or even a very small needle according to this form:
Then insert a small amount of cloth under the incision, and tie it with thread, and leave it for three to four days or five, and if you see urine being made, then close the incision and catch the urine, and then remove it.
And by chance, they do not cover, because the urine that comes out is not left closed.
If the pierced spot is small, and if it is treated with a small needle according to what we have said, it will swell.
Those who do not know how to tie the knot in their penis are weak, because no child is born with a knot at the top of the thigh, since they cannot urinate before they separate their thigh from above. and cannot ejaculate because the matter does not come out in a timely manner, and it is a serious disease.
And the way of the operation is that when the patient lies on his back, the head of the thigh is located like the tip of a penis, if the pertus occurs in the environment, so it should be.
And keep the patient from losing consciousness due to blood loss that often occurs, and if it happens, then treat the wound as soon as possible.
of pustules of the gouge Often, the abscess comes out in the vein, and it looks like a sore appearance;
and in some cases it is malignant and in others it is not malignant.
If you want to burn them under the skin, and cut and clean all of them, then put them in fine cotton wool and apply Egyptian ointment. Then the treatment of the ointment is done as soon as it is healthy.
If the boil is malignant, with a putrid smell and drainage, then you must perform a cauterization.
When you have dislocated the shoulder, and the head of the arm is in a strange position, and it has part of the hair and part of the skin, then you must remove the part that was outside. And if it is swollen, then the cure is to dry it.
For when you dry it together, if you do not secure the head of the shoulder so that it is not perceived, then blackness and corruption come to the shoulder and around.
If you want to heal all that is black and corrupted, then apply honey and flour made from the scars of pumpkin grapes and vines, and then continue with other cures until it is healthy.
And if blood comes out of the wound, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
1. The fire cautery is useful for these positions: 2. It is knowledge to know, at the evacuation of blood, and at the corruption.
3. And if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, then it comes to pass that you bind or lead the shoulder with a cord, and the male releases urine among.
4. And if the hairs reach the head of the shoulder which is not circumcised, or has been cut or lanced, then it comes to pass that you scrape the head with the instrument, as long as the locks are slippery, and free the shoulder from the verge of all parts.
And if this is the case, so that you scrape it with a spatula of no particular value of hair and beard,
Then wash the element between II and I with a fine, cold linen cloth that does not harm.
Circumcision is not a continuation of scars like the others. When we perform this work of our will, and properly as with our children, if it is the best work we can do, and the most pleasing to health.
I say that the ancients did not call circumcision their children's circumcision because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
For I want the largest part of masters and doctors who performed circumcisions at the end of the day, with force, and to every woman.
If it happens that he has two eyes, and by chance that one is covered, then cover the other one. If they come back to their place, and there is double pain, and at the mummification, which is not sure, the sharp pain of the limb is not ensured.
and at the mummification of the bone, by chance it chafes the iron, and burns the work, and many times are born without any mummification, and I want it that way.
Of the circumcision made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces cut both sides equally, either better or worse.
For when you press your hand, if they fit evenly in one, hold tightly. but that the fingers are well stretched out on the leather.
And so the manner of the first wound is, if you think it is a child, that he understands, that you do not force the thread through the verge only, and then I will tie it in all the ways that you please.
Then the tie is made between your hands perfectly straight, and return the forces between your hands or to your fingers that the child does not see, nor any of the strings.
Then put your hand on the girdle and blow or suck, and pull it up as much as the head of the girdle is in. Then clean well the dirty matter that it is assembled, then tie the head of the limb with a double thread, then tie to the other end.
Then clean well the dirty matter that it is assembled, then tie the head of the limb with a double thread, then tie to the other end. And you must take it by the second reading from the pouch and the index finger, and press between the two strings, then gently pull the handle upwards and cut the tip of the rope. Then leave the blood flowing a little, as it is, because it is the best. And sprinkle powder on it and on the powdered fat cooked from a roasted red vinegar, preserved with rose oil and salt, and leave it to dry for another day, and keep the cure until it is cured.
The form of the forces at the wounding is as follows:
The head of the shoulder is dislocated, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement.
The error of the mutilation is if the wounds escape through the incision.
Therefore, you must extend it to your finger, otherwise, the wound will become infected.
and it is placed correctly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the wound will be held with your nails, and then the dressing.
And if they persist for three days, and the part is swollen and inflamed, if it is left until the swelling subsides, and gently scarifies the area.
If the copper is as you say, and you keep hold of the part of the thorn, it will not harm you.
Treat the limb with things made from sand, such as powder, which we have mentioned or treated with powders, and if it does not come off easily, it will be too late; if it does not hurt, it will not matter.
Treat the limb as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
2. Retain urination.
The retention of urine if it is due to opulation of the urethra, or of the vein, or of the bowel, or of the stomach, or of similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra which is at the junction or neck of the bladder, then it comes that the patient's pain is caused by the urethra being caught on its flesh. And the penis is placed on the back, and the abdomen is extended from the part above the back, and the patient is restricted as much as possible. And therefore the bladder is constrained to express itself at the urethra as if the urine were discharged.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it comes that you administer an extraction of all the instrument called "ringer's solution", and its form is.
and let silver be gently plucked out of thin hair, as if it were the quill of an owl. and let the tail of a long and half-grown palm tree be gently plucked at the root.
And the manner of the urine's exit if it is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the root of the hair or cloth, and cut off the end of the thread with the singeing iron.
and cut off the excess of the hair and cut off the end of the tail of the urethra, then anoint the urethra with oil or balsam and urine of onion and olive oil and German tarragon; and make the patient sit on the seat, and the patient's bladder and the verge moisten with oil and olive oil and German tarragon.
Then gently place the ring on the edge, as it reaches the root of the verge, then double the verge in the opposite direction of the bound.
Then fasten the ring before pushing it into the vessel, and feel the patient's pain coming from the empty thing, and this is done according to this order because either you will control or it will turn.
Then the thread is pulled through all the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then it is removed further, and I make sure to remove the urine.
And continue the ring as long as the vessel is empty and the patient's pain has subsided.
When there are scorchings or pains in the bladder, or if there is vomiting, and you see water and medicines being distilled, then do this to all the instrument called "caustic," and it is shaped like this:
She is closed, and if it (the wound) is at third degree: II d’one part, and I of the other, as you see.
And if you see that the wound is chewed by the medicine, and it becomes well smelling with addition, if one can draw the moisture, and bind as soon as possible.
And when you see your medicines gushing from the vessel, put the end of the lance in the moisture, and draw it out through the opening that is there.
If you draw the moisture from the lance, and then strongly bind the opening with the cord. If the moisture enters and it comes to the bladder now, then the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of the clitellum that is used to clitorise the bladder:
And it is of silver or gold, and it is the head higher:
And it is from the side or the line that it is cut:
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw clitorised the bladder, then it forms a double-layered penis between the two seats, and heat the other moisture over the fire:
Then cut the clitoris in the angle, then hold your hand on the vagina until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the vagina.
And if you do not have the vagina, then take a piece of gauze, and make a circle, and the needle should pierce it round. Then cut the strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as we do with the dough, and put ointment, oil, and water, and tie it in the instrument.
And do as you have done with the vagina, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the vagina.
Of the incision
We have spoken of the ways of cutting, and the extraction of assembled medicines.
and I said the difference between the incision and the other signs, and in what kind of incision one should operate for size. and in the bladder, and in the uterus;
and I will tell you about it openly and briefly.
I say that the incision which occurs in the bladder is more common in children, and it is a sign that the uterus has leaped out of the bladder, resembling a sudden increase in its subtlety.
and if it is opened widely, and the woman pains her uterus, and it can be done many times, and then it becomes red. And at the mouth of these leaps, they found.
And the treatment of children up to four years old is light, and it is hard on the joints, and it is harsh in the limbs that are between the joints and the limbs;
And the treatment is lighter for those who have large wounds than for those who have small ones;
When we come to treat the patient, if we first clean the wound with a cloth, we must clean all the feces that is inside the intestines. For it never closes once it has been pricked.
Then take the patient by the feet, and stand up and move to the side, if the wound descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not come out at any time from the top;
Then place the patient between your hands, and his hands are below his thighs, if the bladder is all inclined towards the side;
Then you will see the fire cautery, and touch it.
If you feel the prick in the spine, then cut immediately at the prick.
And if it does not hurt at all, if your index finger shows oil from the left hand, or if your nail is broken, then the patient should be careful. and pull on its base, and feel the prick, and when you feel it with your finger, if the bone is at the top of the thigh.
Then press on your finger, and pull the thread out at the end where you sawed.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand to the top of the clavicles, and his left hand to the bone that is bare at the part where the tail is made.
Then he pours the spumonius, because it is the form. And they make between what is between the clavicles and the foundation, not with a milieu but on the cost of the left nail.
And it should be above the incision, and your wounds should be at the foundation or tail, and the tail should be large enough to pass through if it is wide by defense, and should be narrowed, according to the quantity of the incision, not too large.
By chance, the pressure if it must be applied, which is firmly, will give way to sense of work.
and you should know if it has a piercing or angle, and margins. If it is curved to issue.
And if it is part that is sutured, appears as a gland, and curves, whose exit is lighter.
For the size of the celi, if it has angles and margins, make it larger.
And if it does not give way, then you must pull on the pins that are like a lime at the head, by pulling on the pin to pull the piercing if it does not slip. If you do not use the instrument skillfully at the head,
and if you do not use it skillfully at all, then the wound may become larger, and if it is not detached, then it may be tightened with vitriol.
And if there are more than one wound, then first stitch the largest one at the top of the bladder, then close it, then pull out, and the smaller ones after that, if there are more.
If it is left untreated, it can lead to a large wound and further injury. For two things come to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out unnoticed by the one who does not know how to sew.
But all your efforts to draw or to break the nails, as long as you do it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, if you use the wound of cinnamon and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and then put on gently moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and pink rose and cold water, to soothe the bleeding; Then let the patient lie down on his side, and do not slip the cinnamon oil on the wound.
And when you dislocate it, if the joint is well oiled with oil and wine, then apply the ointment of finicky and basilic, until it is healthy.
And if the wound becomes inflamed and corrodes in the plaice and crusts of cinnamon, and the sand is retained in the bladder, which is held by a part like this without jumping with the urine: 1. If you do not remove the point from the wound, then the blood will flow out and cause infection.
2. Then lift the wound of pain and swelling and scarring, and help it in all ways you know, as long as it is healthy.
3. And it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, that you bind the thighs, and gather the medicines at the knee.
4. And if the wound is small, and it is directed towards the groin, and it is not infected, and the urine does not issue; 5. If this advice is not followed, then you must cut it many times, which is an excuse for the size of this treatment. I have already done that.
I will prepare it according to this form and make it at a 30-degree angle, with one side being the base.
Then take a knife and loosen the flesh around the wound, so that it cannot enter the vein.
Then trim the edges of the wound gently, as far as it reaches the piercing. And turn the edges of the wound in your hand around the piercing as much as you can, until you can feel the other side of the piercing.
If a lot of urine comes out, then press your hand on the part where the wound is being made that has been loosened by the flesh. If it breaks, and it jumps with the urine, and the wound is gushing blood.
When you do not want to do this for any reason, if you cut through the skin and then the bone, you should make the incision as close to the bone as possible, then remove the bone, clean the wound, and freeze the blood that is in the wound. and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
of the bone of women
There are several cases where a piercing is not done correctly in women, and if it has never been done before, and the patient is distressed by the caregiver, and is defended by three things:
one is that the woman is a virgin;
The second sentence translates to: "And it is not possible to find a woman who does not fall into mirrors, even when she is cast.
The third sentence translates to: "And if by chance one cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of hands.
The fourth sentence translates to: "And if the wound of the woman is more than the wound of the man, because it requires a more profound size. And if it needs to be sewn, then it is necessary that you know a skilled hand, and if you do not know, then the truevise on, and if you do not have one, then the subtle mirror;
The present text presents a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command of the incision of the piercing. and look well if the woman is virgin:
and look well if the woman is virgin: and it is necessary to put his duty or foundation and seek the piercing:
and if she is true, if she is constrained to do her duty, and the midwife recommends that she does her duty or with the midwife, and wants to press her left hand on the uterus:
and if she is true, if it is necessary to move her virginity greatly from the entrance of the uterus as far as the root of the thigh:
Then follow the piercing at the root of the thigh opposite the tender mile, where it is most sensitive, and it feels the piercing in that part. and does not move its two largest muscles around the piercing or elsewhere, and it is of the first small size.
and does not move its two largest muscles around the piercing or elsewhere, and it is of the first small size. Then, measure the size of the leg, if you feel the piercing so sharp that it cannot be removed until the wound is healed, and know that there are many ways to prick.
It is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and bent, and those that have thorns.
If you suspect any appearances to know the outcome.
If it is not set, if it puts vitriol on the shoulder, and holds it for an hour until it is stained.
Then return to your work, until the wound is healed, and have stitches that I have told you in the extraction of the wound to help you in your work.
And if it is not set, and it is the artery that is cut, if it puts powder on the shoulder and tightens and bandages and binds, and does not resume this, and leaves the wound and does not open it, by chance the patient dies. Then treat the wound.
When the pain of the wound is eased, and you read the book, if you return to your work, as long as the piercing is still fresh.
Dew is nothing but an assembly of water or white soap, which is dissolved by the urine, which contains the semen.
And it is called "soap," and never truly in the fabric of the semen, if one cares that it is not the other semen. And this is the curdled sperm between the white soap that we have said.
And there was nothing else. And the generation of this grease is such that it comes from the seeds, and it is expanded by that matter.
And never does it come from percussion on the sperm, and this soap is of many colors. Or it is declining in color to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or white water, and this comes more.
This is the sign to attend this assembly, as it is either white and clear or as we have said, if the abscess is pierced, it will be long and look like an oath, and it will not open its pores, as it is moist throughout.
And if it is moist within the same cloth, if the abscess is pricked with a part of the feces, and because one thinks it is other oaths.
And if the moisture is between the hide of the abscess and the white flesh, it feels well.
When you know the color of the moisture, if you probe all the introducer, with the form it is before here. According to what comes after the introcution, judge which is denser.
And when we operate by fire, if the patient is healthy according to our ability and the fullness of his heart.
Then the surgeon takes hold of his back, with something high on his side, and removes a piece of cloth from him.
Then he opens his left side, and commands the assistant to open the right side, and extends the scissors to one of the two costals near the kidneys.
Then he takes the spatula and cuts the abdominal muscle from the pubic bone to the tip of the hip, and makes a straight incision through the abdominal muscle, making sure not to cut too deeply so as not to cause pain.
Then, using the sharp point of the lancet, remove all the thorns from the large pustule, and then insert your fingers, and it will become less painful.
and do not touch the corner of the pustule, but only the lancet. cover all or piece by piece the chest of it, so that if the pustule returns, you will know how to treat it.
and if the wound jumps to your hand, then reset it in the limb as soon as you have completed the surgery with the lancet.
Then, assemble the two ends of the thorns at one point, then treat it like other wounds, as long as it is healthy.
If you suspect the urinary bladder is affected by another disease, if you believe that the veins are hanging, in doubt the evacuation of blood.
Then cut the umbilicus at all the hanging veins, and remove the bladder, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is assembled in two parts, these are the branches; If you cut the other part in the same way as the first dislocation, then apply the oil to the wound, and put soft ointment on the swelling.
If you cut the other part in the same way as the first dislocation, then apply the oil to the wound, and put soft ointment on the swelling. and put another soft linen on vine and oil, and on the two umbilici, and double-folded strips of cloth, and tie it to all the parts according to this form.
Then take two thongs, and use them made of fine thread according to this manner and they should be sewn together by stitching in the groove of the breeches, and some of them prick at the back, and the others at the part on the side.
and the other two thongs are sewn together in the remaining loop of the breeches.
and never has this fire cautery been used on the large piece of iron, and it is that you prick the fine cultivated cautery and cut the leather of the quilts, and if it is as we have said, then if the white that contains the ague is discovered.
If you take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce it with the nails, and scorch at this subtle cauterization.
And you will succeed in all ways that you can think of, as long as you are persistent.
and make sure the fire does not touch the ear.
and you are confident that this work is more beneficial. and keeps away from dislocation and makes sure the size is correct.
and if nothing else makes you worse, or dislocation of the joint or another thing, if you treat what makes you worse, according to what is said before.
If the patient is not cooperative and does not wait for this chapter due to its horror, then there may be a perforation. As I said, and if you are certain by the meanings we have said that the dislocation is here, then place the patient on their side with their legs raised. Pierce the abscess in the lower part of the circumference, and make the perforation as long as possible.
And make the incisions wide enough so that all the pus can flow out.
Then put a bandage on the wound, and tie it tightly, and leave it to drain until the wound is healed.
When the pus does not ooze from the wound in the mouth of the wound, if it comes to pass that you cut a pen or instrument used to drain the pus of the hydropaths, because it forms like this before;
and widens the wound, and cleans it, and re-assembles after six months or more, and when it is re-assembled as before, and in its passage through the joints passes the pain;
Cleans that in the section of this ramification there is more fear in more dispositions, because it seems to me that we should leave it;
And I will tell you the evacuation and appearance of the abscess.
I say that all abscesses come from corns, and they also include; and it is by case;
It is known by excessive sweet and acrid matter, which is expanded by corns, or by percussion;
and the color of the abscess corresponds to that of the corn; and does not cause pain, and is an abscess;
and by chance, there are some abscesses that are painful and purulent, and have a dark color, and never come from arteries or veins;
When it is by artery, if it is sewn up according to the placement of the suture, when you press on your two fingers. and only that you touch with your two fingers.
This one that is made of vein graft is sewn up according to its placement with the two fingers, and can well make the size like this appearance, and like the others. and it is that you cut the corner of the bone, then the wound is high, and the thread is put in white soap, and release the suspension of all parts of the bone.
If the bone is already sewed with these threads, then you must pull the bone and cut it.
If it is stuck in the fist, or if it is caused by the veins being blocked, then it comes that you deliver all of the thistle, and the cup returns around.
If the birth of the child is from below, and it is all born, and you pull out the umbilical cord, as we have said.
When your wounds are completed, apply the smooth linen oil and rose oil and wine to other cures as long as it is healthy.
These are some abscesses surrounded by a surrounding layer resembling a berry, with the softening of the tissues, and the patient groans as it happens.
And the treatment of this disease is well done and promptly, and we will tell you the chapter of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you place the patient on the elevated seat, then lift the suspender of the thighs to your two hands, to all the members that are near the edge, and mark the masters, and extend them.
Then, sharpen the spatula and cut large through the place where the veins are found, as they are discovered, and then scorch from every part, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then, insert a needle or it has a double filament, and tie it to the first knee or the one from which it came, and tie it to the other end. Then, cut the flesh evenly, according to the length of the course, and cut off the rotten moisteners.
Then, treat the wound as you would with others, or if necessary, retract the bowels, so that no vein punctures the intestines.
For there is no harm in it, and all the veins come into view, so it comes to treat the cuts at all the veins. If he does not lose his strength due to the incision of the veins, and they become thin and cannot be helped.
The evacuations of this wound are by section that comes out or by cutting, or by extension to the belly in the part of the abdomen, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the veins.
And this rupture is either due to cutting or by extension, and these two methods of causing the wound are:
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And the signs of this extension is when it comes suddenly and often, in long stretches, and there is no sudden stop. And the abscess becomes larger until it reaches the stomach, because the pus presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it's of sudden facial pain, which brings on pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear, less the skin, and this is from the intestines and the heart of sudden facial pain.
And never has the circles been sent down with the intestines, and it is held in check, and great pain is suffered by the patient, even when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron for fear, because it cannot be escaped.
And the way to open a vein if you command or assist the patient to hold the intestine in their hand at the wound, if they can enter. Then, place your hands on their neck, and gently pull their chin.
Then, take hold of the curtain, and cut all the hair on both sides. Then, cut the tendons of the limbs according to what you can handle for opening the wound, and make them long enough to fit.
Then, scrape off the white hair that is on the skin of the limbs, as much as it can be seen from all sides.
Then, cut your index finger along the line where the hair is on the leg, between the white hair that is under the skin of the thigh and the second hair, and cut it off.
Then move the left hand to grasp the knee, and hold the white side of your right hand up towards your elbow, and gently pull the finger towards the thumb. And instruct the minister to extend the finger at the top, and let go of whatever is behind the limb.
And ask your servant if he has no intestines wrapped around or white flesh hard, and if you find nothing, then cut open the belly.
Then take a needle or if there is a thick thread made of 10 threads, and cut it behind the white flesh which is after the skin of the fingers. After measuring, then cut the hairs that appear to be threads, as there are four threads. Then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie them with thread, which we have mentioned as being of great strength for the leather of the soles, of a strong line of two parts. Then wrap the threads of the hairs, and tie them into two parts, so that no one of the scissors that cuts can enter into us, that the hair does not happen. And lay the thread according to the first long thread, and after these two threads leave the thread which is of great strength for the leather of the soles, of a strong line of two parts. and then according to the rules that the foot carries.
then proceed to the part where the leather of the thighs is loose, whether it is without a sole or a heel, as we have said before.
then spread fine oil on the skin, and make incisions, and then spread the line that we have mentioned. And no time is the white suet ever cauterized that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bloodletting. For this is often done, and leave the line as it is for him.
And if it lags in the cloth, then raise it with hot water, and apply what we have said, as long as it is.
Then, treat the wound with another treatment, as long as it is completely healthy.
of hernia surgery
In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by iron.
And the ancients said it was made like the viscera which is assembled like the veins, in a similar way that you tie the arteries, after which the cut is lightly made on the outside.
Then, close it with a thread, and treat the wound of that which operates, as long as the veins are tight.
And the treatment is as we have said, as long as it is completely healthy.
Never does gangrene come to angry wounds, as we have said, and open it.
and no bowels come out, and if they do, it's a sign of serious illness, and repair them all hours.
and if it drains too much at this point, if it believes the wound or syphilis, as long as the intestines come out.
and this is due to the extension of syphilis, which we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes soft and narrows the lips and opens.
and the cure is by cauterization, as we have mentioned before.
and never has a cure been made in this way: The patient's shoulder pops out of its place between your hands, then pull the leg away from the rupture, which is swollen and large according to the quantity of three.
Then remove the scar that is loose from the skin, then take your finger and place it on the shoulder appearing to have more scar.
Then press your finger at the lower abdomen, then count the two limbs appearing to have more scar from the finger tip to the other.
Then remove the leg from the knee, and do not pull on the scar or stretch the urethra or anything else, as I have told you in the care of the ramification of the intestines. Then the treatment by the treatment of wounds.
Then the treatment by the treatment of wounds. When you cut the strings, if the wound is cleansed and treated, as soon as it is healed.
The scar is firm and has no appearance of a fracture, and the cauterization is more effective at this distance.
of the softening of leather of the thongs.
Many times are softened the hair of the beard in any man, because the hairs that are densified are softened, and it can be seen.
And it is a task, when one sees the beard being treated, to make the patient bend over, and the barber cuts the softened hair on the natural hair.
Then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened hair is at three stitches or four firmly;
Then cut between the stitches, and the barber as with other wounds, as long as it is healthy, and cut the thread.
1. The text does not provide a sentence to
1. Injuries that are caused by violence are classified in our law, and this is why I do not want to discuss them in detail in this book.
2. It is necessary for two reasons:
3. The other reason is that the injuries are classified according to the response of the patient when asked about them and their treatment.
4. And the other reason is that we often have to perform surgery on animals for their benefit, such as on sheep and lambs, and goats and other animals.
5. Therefore, injuries are classified in these two ways. Either by attraction, or by burning.
In the one we make by attraction, let our hands be in hot water, as long as they are softened and while. Then pull on your hand, as long as it is back in place and you no longer feel it.
Of the austerity of size: It is necessary that you pull the best, and press the leather of the joints to your left hand, then release the suspender, and cut each knot at each hip, when you have well burned them.
and leave no sore or subtle sore that is near the veins.
And this manner of cauterization is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because attraction wears out with chance, no matter the size of the bones, and the beast desires luxury.
Then cure the wound as long as it is healthy.
The translation of "des hermofrodites" is:
Heroism is according to two ways for men: One is that between the two bones it is open as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and never once in cutting the urine.
And the other way is for women, and it has as much hair as a vine and the members.
And the care of the mouth and stomach is that you cut all the loose charms and cure them as other wounds.
In the second manner, men whose urine leaps through the skin of their thighs, if there is no treatment.
Tenting is a char that is placed on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see. and no women have had such a hand, and this is the cure.
It is necessary that you bind the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or fingers, and lightly cover it.
and do not let it get too far, because the blood does not come, then the cure of another cure until it is healthy.
For another char that is not in the mouth of the mare, and the employs, and by chance it jumps forward, and appears as the appearance of a cow, and therefore they called the old "cow's disease". If you are able to copy it, if as we have said, and cure it as soon as it is healthy.
However, if the nature of the woman is not well understood, or the cough is small. and is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that came from it.
and is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that came from it. or it is by a strange char, or a subtle facial or espadrilles, and is made in front of the mare, or the cost, or the shoe, or whatever.
and the design, and the birth, and by chance the flowers to have.
and the knowledge of this if it is by the restraint of the dance.
If the head is pressing against something, whether it's your body or another object.
If it is hard to remove, and it is close as it is, if you hurry, and it will turn back.
put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs.
then the two levers are formed, as long as the subtle fac is removed and over the tight ones.
then take linen and oil, and put it on the limb, and make the woman lie down every hour, if it does not stick.
And if the pain is hard and sudden, then you must gently hold the joint as if it were a slate of marble.
If the joints are cold, if the bone is spent and the flesh.
and use the remedies that quench blood, such as mercury, dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine.
then make a large cut, if the wound cannot be sewn.
and it should be long, and a tent of dry linen is made.
Then, treat other wounds as needed while they are still healthy.
And when in the marriage there comes a dislocation, if it is necessary to cut according to this manner, then it should not be enchanted with pins. For the incision of the scarlet fever, which is in the marriage, it should not be touched with firmness.
of hemorrhoids Embroideries are open veins that without customary scarring, and when they become old, they become thick.
In the division of appearances and signs, I will mention those that require care.
I said that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are formed in the marriage, do not appear by feeling, unless it is with a firm cure.
Those that are in the mouth of the marriage can be felt, are those that can be cured.
It is necessary that you put the woman in a cool house, then remove the nails from the horseshoe, and cut off the roots of the horsehair, then powder the medicines restricting blood, as well as those for dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then cut the horsehair and put it in cold water for an hour, then dry it.
And if the blood comes out, if you put it in a decoction of sumac and the juice of grenate pomes and gall and similar things, then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and vinegar, and apply it to his back.
If it is inflamed, it is good. If not, make him lie down on his back and tie his arms tightly;
then take the wine, and the juice of plums or willow with it, and make him drink.
And when he has vomited, take care of the wound with an ointment as soon as it is healthy.
And the ointment called "albathir" is red and resembles the spicy herb "thula", if it is effective, then it is similar to the turmeric. And then take care of him as soon as he is healthy.
Many types of abscesses come to the married woman, such as chancre and other purulent abscesses, herpes and fistulas and blisters and chancroids and abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is therefore necessary that I give in this treatment the first aid for the wound that comes in the marriage, which is not the worst of wounds but is caused by bows.
And if you see the fire cautery, then look at whether the wound is still in the beginning of its arrival, and see for caution and fever, and if it becomes red, you will see it. However, do not force the pearl, but make it as long as the pain is eased.
And then make the patient sit on the bed, and have two pillows under his head, and support his back and assemble his limbs as to hold the leg.
And let his thighs be expanded, and put on his boots above his knees, and tie them well with a bow.
Then proceed the dressing towards the left side of the chest, and insert the instrument used to open the mouth of the marriage, and after that comes the form.
And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being inserted, you fix the rait first to know the fitting of the marriage, so that what comes out of the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not harm the patient. And if the rait is larger, it is necessary to cover the fitting of the marriage with cloth, so that the rait does not hurt.
It is necessary that he places the instrument's horn at the joint, and grinds the instrument.
And when the abscess is open, and it is touched with wet hands, if it comes into contact with the head, at the spinal marrow.
And when the wound is visible, it comes that you put in the wound soft tentacles in olive oil or green vegetable oil.
And put the tent of the wound at the edge of the marsh, and put through the marsh and through the clean soft tentacles in the water or in the mud that are cooked.
Then the cure after two days of ointment coming to this, as long as it is healthy.
And no time the wound and the plague are raised by honey and vinegar, and then vinegar or roots of lilies and Aristotle are cooked. Then comes the ointment.
And if the wound is dressed in the marsh, then it comes to your attention that you should not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
of childbirth Most important is the dance where she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are such when you see the woman press against the wall, and desires to smell the aroma of amber.
However, do not delay in giving birth to the children. Then you know that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from your own chief, and the second one with him.
When you see these signs, if it is necessary to lightly press on his abdomen, if the child is cold.
If he descends from his throne, and if it is with him, and the marriage of his superfluities by good cleaning.
And that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it never comes on its own piercings, and it comes from the chest or neck, and the hands, or it comes from the belly or stomach, and it is converted by chance with his collar, and by other harmful figures.
If it is necessary for the dance that she be skilled and subtle in these things, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures of how one should help.
When the child comes out of its head naturally, and the mother gives birth with great effort, and her virtues are weak, if it is placed on a pillow or the women hold it.
and its nature is olive oil or fenugreek, and then boil the baby between its two little feet, and this is the form: and cut the second one, and cut as much as the moisture that is left behind.
and cut the woman's stomach as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clyster the woman with muslin of fenugreek with olive oil.
Then I will prepare and administer the anesthetic, and hold their mouth and nose for an hour. If you are now ready, I will insert the enema.
And if the hands do not come out quickly, it will be necessary to gently move them a little at a time. And if they do not go in, the woman should sit on the edge of the bed, and gently lift the feet up. Then the woman should lie down on the ground, and tie her feet together so she does not fall.
And if the hands do not go in, and the enema dies, she should hold her hands on the side that is closest to her, remove the child, and reset it gently.
Of the child's foot that was cut off When the children come to their toes, if they can put it on high. and then turn it a little at a time, until it is even.
then pull on the toes and stretch it a little at a time.
Can it jump like a knot, if it is commanded to pull, and I make it tighter by condensing? If it jumps, may God see.
And if it does not jump high jumps, as we have said, if the shoe is tightened a little at a time until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not jump as we have seen, say that it is made of muslin, oil of silk, and melted rubber, and all in cement. and make it like the nature of a woman in labor and this ache, then make her sit in a warm bed until the costels are dry.
and when she is wet with sweat, make her milk a bit and then put her on, and leave her for an hour. then make her sit on the seat, then make her stand and shut her mouth and nose, and press lightly on the belly because the child is now coming.
Of the issue of the child with its gums When the child comes in this form, if she holds it with her hands a little at a time. then hold the baby on its belly, and let its feet hang down, and then gently shake the cradle. The patient folds their hands a few times, and then places them on their stomach, and presses the knees towards the chest as much as possible. If the fetus does not jump, then take your hands and move them, then move the belly forward, and then pull your hands. The child folds its hands a few times. Instruct the woman to push as much as possible until the child is born.
Of the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand during birth. It is necessary to bring the hand back. If it cannot be brought back, then lift the woman up and move forward.
If it cannot move, if I do not rule over it with my hand, and the legs form;
then the muscles I have mentioned will be wasted.
and if it does not give birth, if I set it on my seat, then it will study the return of the hand. and the child follows its natural form, and I make it smaller, and I command it to suck as much as the child can.
Of the issue of the child from its neck, and its hands expanded, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the dance marks its hand, then turn it slightly and lightly, and the child.
And when it is even, if it puts on the muscles of the elder and the oil, as we have said, then it commands it to move slightly and lightly.
When you have this done, if it is placed on the thigh, and it is commanded to be pressed down. Then it will be flattened. 2. In the same way for all the second part.
2. In the same way for all the second part. When it comes in this manner to the rest of the body, if the rest is not held in your hand, as long as there is moisture.
And if it can be held on the face and neck, if the bandage is not tightened, and the patient dies.
Then bind the child's leg, as long as you have it in place, and command the woman to press down never.
Of the issue of twins It is said that they are born many times, and never in the third or fourth month. And this is a strange thing, and few come to know it. Two things are strange, and they do not live long, and have little name.
Two things are strange, and they do not live long, and have little name. I know that they are multiplied, and are destroyed by the sickle which devisages them, which is bound to the hood.
And they never come naturally like all at once, as we have said.
And if they come seriously, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and it is made quickly and gently what it does. And make it as it is worth to greet. Of more children
No times are formed in the marrying I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the great joy, and cover that the sick dance, because by chance similar things come to it; If you make it according to this that is necessary.
Of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead or pregnant child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to open with hands; If it happens that you should cut yourself on the woman's body and there is no accident or she dies of pain.
If it happens that the woman is thin on her back and her head hangs down, and her legs are raised.
and the midwife applies the cautery of the second part, or if she is lying in bed so that she is not treated for the descent of the child.
Then grease the mouth of the midwife with warm oils using musk and fenugreek and the seeds of flax, then grease her hands with these oils and these musk.
Then the bones are lightly cut, then the shoulder or the collarbone that can be bent is freed, and one should hold the child steady until it descends from its head.
If the bones are found in the ears or neck or mouth or nose or beard or chin or breasts, and if it is severed, then it should be cut off and the costal muscles are separated. If the costal muscles are sutured with threads, they should be removed after a few days.
And it is necessary to cut the bone in the left hand, and place the beak between the two fingers of the right hand, and it is cut lightly in all these ways that we have mentioned, until it fits into the empty one.
Then find another onion, or the other one that you have, if the extraction is equal;
And then the onion is even when moving from one side to the other, by gripping it with both hands, and so the onions are held with both hands, if it is in this form:
And if a part is removed, if there are any of its two oils left in that part, and take them out in that part, and handle the other part;
And if it is not removed, then put this onion or higher up on the hand, and do so until it is all used up.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot return due to the strain, then you must wrap it around as tightly as possible, until it is entirely. Then the bandage is tied around the ankle or knee joint, and if it is done with one hand and the other foot, then you must do it with the other hand and the other foot.
And if the child's head is large and it is difficult to deliver, or there is a sudden rush of blood, then you must cut the sharp spatula between your two hands, and sew the head and remove the blood. or you may bring it to the instrument called "almidach," if its form comes with the menstrual blood or after the chapter.
And similarly, it is natural for the child to learn on its own.
And then, if the bones are sharp, and the head is forced and held in place as much as possible, even if it is painful, until the moisture that has come out or will come out stops.
And if it cannot be pulled out, then use the method you have chosen.
And if it is twisted in the belly or dislocated from the ribs, then you must pierce it as much as the moisture allows.
And if the child is in its mother's womb, if it feels a light attraction, and the cord is attached to the woman's mouth.
And if it is twisted in the belly or in the stomach, then you must stretch it by wrapping it around your hand. and when they feel the belly or the thighs, as long as the moisture is present.
and if another bone is broken, and the limb is swollen, if blood comes from the wound, and it is drawn out of the mouth of the wound. then I bite or II, and it is drawn out.
and if the mouth of the wound is pulled back by the swelling, and there is no pain, then it must be dressed with things that are moist and heavy. and the dressing is applied, and it is made to soften and moisten.
If the child is on its chest, and you place it evenly, then do not move it as we have said in the living child.
And if it is not possible, then if the leg is broken and nothing of the second part remains.
And when you have done this, do not move it as we have said in the cases of abscesses that come from wounds.
And if the evacuation of blood comes, then if it is put in astringent and restricted, and other treatments are not done.
And I see a woman in whose belly some children had died, and then consulted another who said this, and caused the death of others. After long time, some abscesses appeared in the wound, and inflamed as soon as they were seen, and began to make great pressure.
I was called for the cure, and I thought it long, and could not open the wound.
I applied strong attraction with my fingers, and after a few hours, more than others. I was surprised, because the belly has no bones.
If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
I want the wound, and in turning the hands over, as long as the woman was better at one point. The woman's long hair is tightly bound, and it is held back a little with a piece of cloth.
I have not forgotten this chapter because when the master is faced with an unusual thing, I know how to help.
Then comes the form of the pressor, which consists of the books.
and it turns to the heads of the two legs. Indeed, the horns are more subtle and restrictive, and are made of flat or bowed wood.
and the mouth is of the width of a tooth, and the margin of the trees is one and a half palm lengths. And in the second line, the limbs are described as being twisted or bent, which could be a result of dislocation or other injury. The term "half palm" is not clear without additional context, but it might refer to a specific type of injury or measurement. The phrase "one more" suggests that there may be multiple instances of this injury or condition.
And these twisted limbs are bitten into the mare's mouth to open them when turning the two corners. This sentence suggests that the limbs are being manually manipulated or corrected by a human, likely a veterinarian or animal handler, to realign them and alleviate pain or injury. The term "cornes" is not clear without additional context, but it might refer to specific parts of the limb or joint that need to be addressed.
Another form, which is more subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made of flat or square wood or basswood, depending on the appearance of the nails. This sentence suggests that the limbs can be repaired or corrected using different materials or techniques based on the appearance of the nails or other factors. The term "tenailles" is not clear without additional context, but it might refer to the nails or fasteners used in the repair process. and if you see, from two fingers wide, and it must be large;
and when you see the vagina fully open, if the woman lies on her back, the thighs spread apart, then adjust the two dislocations together in the vagina, and hold the instrument's handle between your fingers. then move your hand along the entire instrument, according to how much you see the vagina opening, as long as it is comfortable for her to do so.
This instrument is all around, and is multiplied in its appearance. And when you appear to the patient, the more hurriedly you act, the higher the chances of success for the patient.
2. If you do not despise the instrument because you have not seen it, for its requirements are not easily overcome.
When the second child is held in the womb, if you command the midwife to hold the umbilical cord, then carefully cut it, and then pull it out of the vagina, and keep your hands on the mouth and anus. And if she jumps for joy at this, that is good.
If not, then I can, and make a puncture or a cut, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the mother, such as cloves, cinnamon, chamomile, calamus, cardamom, and centaury. All of these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or placed under fire.
Then place a spigot or stopper in it, and the other end in the mare's mouth, and heat it until the vapor rises from the mare.
Then the fire is extinguished, as we have said. If the second part is difficult.
And if it remains after this cure, and is not better, then order the woman to moisten her left hand in olive oil or musk, and then blow into it, and she will receive the second dose. And when she finds it, if she pricks and extends it a little at a time, until the mare does not resist the extraction.
But they want to move lightly to the right and left, and then draw it. If it comes and dries out.
And if the mouth of the arrow is stretched, we have said the treatment is to tighten and fumigate with herbs.
And if it is not all of what we have said, then keep that you do not pull too hard.
But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the arrow, you tie it to the woman's thigh, then apply ointment from a four-drug mixture. If it swells and is reset, and comes back out.
But if it happens that she comes out with an unpleasant smell from the stomach and head, and makes the patient wince. If, then, there are convenient fumigations for this:
none of the ancients have proved fumigations of cress and dry figs.
The form of the instrument is made with it that it fumigates the woman with the retention of flowers and secondines if this is.
And it seems like a dog, and puts the large head under the nature, and the large heads under the fire.
and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the skin as long as it is dry, and another one begins again.
Many children are born who have not yet felt the foundation, but they have been exposed to some subtle smoke. If it comes to the point that one perceives that the bone is exposed in its place, and does not perceive any other bone perforated, and avoids the sharp points of the spatula, and does not touch the ligament.
Then apply soft cloth wet with vinegar and oil, then the care of ointment as soon as it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not happen, if you put on a piece of cloth and leave the wound open, and if it is not sewn up when the child is seen in the chamber.
And never comes a case of soaking of wound or abscess. If it comes to the point of soaking. If you treat, as we have said about the cataplexy.
Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow when they come from the deeper parts of the foot, or in the spaces between the two parts, if there is one or more fistulas.
When the node is old, if it is worked on, and the moisture is applied to the wound or subtle bowels, and never are these fistulas present.
They are known by the fact that they occur when the patient has an evacuation or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance some fall.
And if the fistulas are located in the bladder and half of the vagina. and reach the joint of the uterus and the outlet of the vagina.
And it is known that the fistula is present at the foundation, and is not a fistula. When you have found your point of entry or foundation, and insert a fine wire of iron or silver into the fistula when it has no curves.
And if there are curves, then insert a small noose of wire or horsehair, as you feel the noose or hair in your hand.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no emission of gas, no pain, and no fever, as we have said. Make sure it does not pierce through. If you feel any pain.
When the fistula is present in the uterus or carried by the urine, if the urine jumps, and cannot be soaked by medicines.
And if it pierces through the joint of the finger, if the noose or hair touches the flesh. If there is no tortuosity and the pain is not excessive, then it is because it is in its proper place, and no remedy is needed by itself;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of proud people who enter them;
In the one that is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient suffers from pain in their hands on their back;
and they gently lift the legs until they reach their thighs, and they have their thighs inclined towards their belly; Then apply a bandage of rain, or if it has knots, as long as you see or the bandage comes.
If the patient feels pain in the joint, it means that the bandage has come off.
And if you feel between your feet or thighs, then check that the bandage is correct, therefore check that it is in place. If you cannot find it, no matter how hard you try.
It is said that one can always find it, but it is not easy.
And if you help, if you cut the cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as it is said. and the bone is very hard when it is inserted into the fistula, as long as it fits well at the foundation. and cut it twice or three times, as long as you think that these points must be sharp, which resemble a quill of a feather.
then the treatment of the wounds are made smooth and round, as long as it fits, then the treatment of the ointment enchanting the bone and soaking.
If it is in good health, then so be it.
And if not, no other name can be healthy.
And if it fits tightly, and does not perforate the foundation that is at the bottom, and between your thumb and index finger, and you see the fistula at this point where the covering does not reach; If the head of the fistula, and it grows longer before the tent, and then the cauterization is done afterwards, as soon as it reaches the top of the tent. and will be delivered to the tent, and will hurt.
Then defend those that seem like a feather of a swallow, and there are none left.
If it does not please you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medical boil.
For the fire cautery assembles two things: it is to know, the surety of these dislocated bones, and the stopping of blood and the removal of moisture.
Then the treatment of tented wounds can be made with burrs or with sharp knives, as long as it does not bleed too much, and the bones will be set in the wound.
Then, treat the wound of the sourd sores with uncooked dough, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return often.
And if a fistula comes suddenly with great force, and it is moved away from the body, and its base is damaged, and you should investigate this.
If you feel the tent, and it is the cloth or silk or charcoal, if not been that way by chance, then it is due to the administration of one of the three ways:
or you burn it as we have said, or you cover it with lint and care for it as before;
and do not let it get too far, that you do not cover the foundation which holds the foundation, and you will expel the exudations through the desired sense. Then the treatment, as we have said;
Then the treatment, as we have said; By chance if it is healthy, or you remove that covering and the muzzle before it is covered with the foundation, or by attempt or another instrument appointed; Then mend the wound that is in the wound, as much as you can; Then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part that is more firm the foundation:
Then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part that is more firm the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And no time are fistulas according to this manner: And when you bind the tent in the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation of the skin, if you take a tent percussive at the head according to this form: And if you cut it in two, and pull the tent through all of it in the fistula as much as it is at the head:
If it is present at the edge of the foundation, then remove the thread of that pertus; if you reach the end of your foundation.
and cut off the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and pull them apart, and leave one or two.
and do not constrain it more than the threads that are between those two, and tighten.
Then treat the wound as long as it is sore and sound.
If the fistula does not perceive, if you try to feel it in all ways that you can, it will not be too difficult. For it is not necessary to make the dressing too tight, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The form of the sharp-spined thorn that was used to make the fistula if it is full and of one piece, part and stretch. And on the other hand, because it is not possible to cop (or perhaps "cope") with what must be coped with, as you see here:
Ammories are according to two ways: Or they are made of denser material, like resin grains, and they become smaller and larger, and when cut, they have one or more, and they make the foundation stronger and at the top of the foundation;
However, those that are denser have little moisture, and when cut, they have a small piece of sharp citron or a small piece of sand, and they have the color of the core;
And the cure of those who have dug the foundation, if you instruct the patient to sprinkle with water as much as possible, until the foundations are firm and the legs appear, and they see the threads. If you hurry, and it can hold nails, or if you keep it in your nail, then it covers in its roots.
And if the uncut cannot hold by its moisture, then it is placed at the edge, or on the cloth, or from a piece of camomile. And extract them from your hands, then cover them, and powder with no hot powders that are in the fire cautery. If you cauterize as instructed in the chapter of cauterization, then apply other treatments as necessary until it is healthy.
And if they do not come apart, then apply a cauterizing agent such as clisterine, which is bitter and sharp. Wash the area where they are stuck, and if possible, open it widely. If the patients cannot bear the pain, and their wounds are deeply stuck, then apply a light treatment to relieve the pain.
If the patients cannot bear the pain, and their wounds are deeply stuck, then apply a light treatment to relieve the pain. And if you burn them with your finger or nails, then cover them, and treat them as we have described, until they are healthy and do not fear the incision by fire. If it is necessary to undo the stitching according to this method:
If it is necessary to undo the stitching according to this method: Take one thread, pull it through the eye, and then pull the other end of the thread through the eye, making sure the needle is on the other side. Then, turn the two ends of the thread over the needle and pull them through the eye again, if necessary.
And pull the thread tight, then knot it, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave the excess of the suture to be cut off.
Then roll the foundation and soften it with oil or wax, place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
Then it is left until they heal, and when they are whole, if the cures of ointment and other cures are done properly, then it will be healthy.
The first sentence translates to: "If the joint is not firmly set. The second sentence translates to: "Often, the joint is not firmly set due to moisture in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is severe, and medicine is ineffective. If you must return to the point of a splint or your nail that scrapes off the skin, which does not allow it to get wet. Then the treatment as soon as it is healthy, as it is done.
And if it cannot be healed, then the scratching resumes more forcefully than before, as soon as it is healthy and scorched. Then the treatment as soon as it is healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou A small insect is a small appearance about the chest, and it bites often.
And never the fever leaves, and it feels like death, and it comes throughout the body, and more than the hands than other parts.
And the cure is if you take a brad from a goose feather, or a vulture feather, and put that brad on the fever, as long as it circles around the fever completely outside. Then turn your hand over all the brad as you cover all around the fever, and set it in place, and pull out the fever from its roots.
And if you see that I make this of a bone of iron or steel according to this form, and it is subtle and thin and true: 1. Do not let it escape, but hold it tightly, and press it.
And if you see that the cauterization causes the patient to tremble, as it does in this chapter of cauterization.
1. Never has a cauterization been made with silver or archaut, or with melted gold or twisted wire.
1. And never has a cauterization been made with these small and large bites, according to the size of the wound. Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small. The form of the small and great burn is such that it covers a wide area, or the belly is influenced in this manner:
1. And if there is a deviation or the belly is lying down, as you see, and the head is not felt, then.
and to one of the two costes of the pouch, and in the other one.
and it may be the belly or if it is a vessel of beast or parchment, and it is perceived all around from many punctures, and it must have a spice between each puncture I, then bounce in these punctures I strong thread made of silk or cotton, and assemble the belly as if it were a chevre. and when the medicine is given, if the line has an instrument before with a strong thread, then stitch.
and it is the form of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of urine, or something similar, then the pain will ease slightly. Then the midwife assembles her two hands, as much as she can, then removes the clister, and gently relaxes her legs at the door, and if the medicine seems to help, as much as it can. And if she sleeps a whole night, it will be more helpful.
And if you dislocate the abdomen due to disease, and the medicine seems to be working, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
And if the discharge is thick or bloody, or anesthesia, if the clister is also subtle as for the child.
and it is the form of a hidden clyster subtle when the skin is stretched:
we have said in the division of the cure of wounds;
or we will say the cures of hands and medicine according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the instrument or the wound is made, and of how they are made.
The things made by wounds are made by the point of the pierce, and the size of the eye and the grip, or the lance, or the stake, or the needle, or similar things;
or what is made according to the rules of the wounds, like a clyster when it pierces the breast, or the neck, or the belly, or the liver, or the stomach, and similar members;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple wounds, as the memory comes in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or goes, if it is not broken, if it is due to grime of the wound or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of apoplexy: if I make it safer for the head myself, and if it is healthy in the opposite part of the nose;
and avoid the patient's fullness of wine and large meats.
And if he does not see that it is healthier, then let his meat be lean and do not drink wine and do not eat bread.
and put the wound under pressure, and if blood comes out, it will be oily or red, or like wine.
And if he does not apply pressure to the wound, then put it on the wound and it will be fresh at all its base, and it will not move due to the air, dust, which I will mention later.
And if he moves the wound, then apply some ointments, as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, like that of a spear and similar, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be reassembled by sewing, if I say as stomach wounds, from the stitching.
If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it is large, and holds only by a small part of it, then the wound is closed. Then, treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness of the leather in the shoe, and instruct the patient to eat large amounts of raw meat, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as chicken, and similar things.
And if you have skin or leather for food, and it does not reach the bone, then it should be completely removed and cooked thoroughly, and then it can be cured.
And if the wound or vein has been closed without cutting it, and it cannot be healed by medicine, then the wound should be opened and if the skin is loose, it can be tied with a string. And if this does not benefit him, then the cauterization is useless.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then he can be treated lightly: And if you put on this powder that smells like it has not been used, then he will be treated with it:
And the manner of the powder is as follows: Take some candle and: burn it in two parts: clay lives three parts, and the fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and pull out as much as it sticks well and joins with all his smoke:
And then the limb is well, and it is left to drip, if it does not enflee. For as long as the medicine is healed, there is no need for it.
And never once has it been done with anything but fire, when there is no incense or blood of the dragon, but that the artist has moved the wound.
And if the wound is large, at the same time, if I do not put any of this powder;
but instead use some digestive ointments, or made of wheat flour from the oven and honey, until it bows down; Then the treatment of other treatments as long as it is healthy.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if you pull it with subtle tweezers;
And I will tell you about the wounds of the head later.
Of the wound of the shoulder
A wound comes of the shoulder
If it is the nerve, if there is no other means than leaving the treatment, and nothing restrictive is put on it, because it does not harm the nerve and draws it back. and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of such is with the cerebral, which is the more sensitive member.
but if the medicine is soaked, like chald if it is washed in gentle warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and then washed again in gentle warm water, and other piercings of mine according to this method, and moistened.
If the wound is large, if it is bound with bandages, then the treatment is as soon as it is healthy.
And if the wounds are fully developed and the hair is thick and full of bristles, then the prick or lower down the leg.
And if the artery is coiled, and the blood flows out, then the evacuation of blood comes, and the patient dies, and the cauterization is the most effective.
And if the spine of the neck is coiled, or the tongue, and the head is guided, as long as the meat goes, if the bone is above the throat, and does not touch the head but is replaced according to its natural figure; And then the extraction is performed, and it leaves some scars, then the treatment of discharge as long as it is healthy;
If the patient wishes to make an impression on the bone, they can. If the patient has pieces of bone, and they are not careful, and if they do not leave enough time for the wound to heal, and it becomes infected and inflamed, then...
If the wound is fresh, and powder is applied as I have said. If it has bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then the treatment is as I have described in this chapter.
If it is a wound from a spear or arrow, and the wound is deep, then observe if the wound is bleeding heavily, and if so, apply pressure with the hand of the patient. And if the wound is mortal.
And if it is not fully cooked, and it is fresh at all its pores, if no powder is put on it in the first hour, nor bound with the suet that does not cause it to lose its freshness, and it revives in the chest, and the patient feels better. But I apply an attractive ointment, and I bind it twice a day.
And if you have no ointment, then put a piece of cotton in the wound for sweetness to dry out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more. If no spasm comes, nor is there trembling in the chest that does not strain the arms. When you see the proper bone arrangements, you should think the wound is saved. Treat the swelling with compresses and other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
And if it does not heal, and you think it has formed an abscess, then do something about it.
If the treatment is done correctly. And if the wound is an incision or a cut, and it is simple, or on the back, if the treatment is done by the one in front of you. If it is large, require stitches.
If it is small, use powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and the pieces are removed when the wound is healed, then the wound will be healed. If they do not resist, if the wound is left exposed, if the extractions are aligned.
and other wounds have other limbs judged as we have said.
The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre." In English,
The dislocations of the abdomen are large and numerous and small.
from the large wound no time the intestine is leaped, or the intestines are injured by it, by the insertion of others.
and the stomach is more painful, and no time the small wound is better than the large, because one has to reinsert the intestines several times if one does not put them back in place each time.
For the intestines swell so much that they feel the pain, if they return more often, and for the reason that it weakens the wound, for the reason that we sometimes have to reset the dislocation of the shoulder, for the reason that it causes great pain and injury.
And you say that the intestinal rupture occurs in four ways:
The two common types of abdominal hernia are the abdominal hernia and the hernia in other parts of the body, and the other two types of hernias are common in other parts of the body.
And all of them are more common with the abdominal hernia, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no inflammation in the intestines, and it is a difficult matter to set, this is done by one of the following two methods: Either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the blow.
And when it is swollen, treat it in this way: soften an sponge or a damp cloth only, or wash it with cold water and rinse it, and clean the intestines as much as they will absorb.
And no time has it been made to keep the wound closed and it is dead that it does not want to be opened.
And when you see the blooming depart, if the intestines are swollen or stretched and the veins are twisted, for this is the cause of the narrow entry of something.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the wound with the instrument of coping the blood;
And the first treatment is dead that it does not cut the size, that no one needs to cut in great need and has not.
And this is the reason for the splitting:
If the thread cuts through the feather and does not pass, and if it looks like this: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs forth, if you return it according to its natural form in its own place, if you can, for this is good.
If the wound is large and it is in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary that you lay the patient on their stomach, and raise their legs higher than their head. If the wound is in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary that you raise the head and the legs higher than the abdominal walls, and if the wounded part is one of the two, then you should agree that the raised part is higher than the other.
And it is necessary to manage what I say about large and dirty wounds.
The first sentence translates to: "If it hurts slightly, then take your hand and apply wet bandages to all the wounds on your hand, and gather your lips.
The second sentence translates to: "This is the common way to stitch wounds. You take an awl or several, according to the size of the wound's depth, then leave the end of the wound open and sew it with a needle thread strong. The third sentence translates to: "Then pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the suture thread, which is loose from the leather, as long as you can pierce it from that side, and assemble the two ends of the suture thread with the four.
Then the strain of a double thread through the needle of II part, then assemble the II heads of the wound, and then leave I two spicules, and then choose another needle.
Then lay the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you are used to with needles, until all the wound is held in place.
And let the needles be sharp and not too large, for sharp needles close the wound completely, and very large ones cannot enter well. For it is necessary that they be sharp.
and do not thrust the nails too far into the horse's shoulder and leather, which do not hold and cause the wound to reopen in front of the suture.
and then cover the heads of the nails to prevent them from causing inflammation in the patient's sleep, and use cloths or blankets on the heads of the nails to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
and this method of stitching with nails is more convenient in small wounds, because it does not cause an aguille or two.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you sew the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thread, and they are sewn together with one nail or it has a strong thread.
When you have perceived these four conditions assembled, first reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner we have described for the threads.
and insert a splice between each stitch of the large end of one thread.
This stitch saves the man, and I saw a wound that some had in their bellies, which was caused by a needle, and it was more than one palm wide, and it had intestines that were more than two palms wide, and it was the wound in his belly.
I took the intestine and after it had been out for 24 hours, it was 15 years old, and the wound was healed, and I cured it, and it became healthy.
And he saw the blood that would not stop, and it was a miracle.
and do not cure it with ointment, because I am in II the shoulder where they do not find any, and no medicine. and put on more than twice the amount of cotton lint under the wound, and wash it with honey as often as it is healthy.
Or you may say the two ways of dressing:
take the needle, and pull out the thread from the part that is most difficult to sew.
when it has perceived the right way in the right direction, if you have pulled the needle or cut it or made the thread perceive another part of the difficult part, and make it perceive from another part of the easy part.
And when they understand this method, if you also follow the pliers like they do the hair, and once you shave one side, then you take the other, until the stitching is completely done.
The second method of stitching, which Galen himself uses, is if it is done correctly by anyone, which naturally brings together the two parts, and applies one end of the beard to the other, in this way:
Insert an awl or beard of iron close to the skin, and make a mark on that part only, and leave the two ends of the beard of hair. Then turn the needle, and I make it feel at the part of the wound that is most hurtful to you.
Then I make it feel at both parts of the wound that are most hurtful to you.
And this is the worst way to sew and the most common.
Galen says this word, and no one testifies, you must sew the belly to the needles, or there is thread in each.
And it must be sewn one needle at a time, and the other at another, in the way that these are sewn together.
And you ask if when the fracture is near the stomach, it is the cost more painful than others in the stomach.
They judge the wound if it is like the judgments of other wounds:
And it is that if you clean the fresh wound with all its blood, but if it has not moved, then reset the intestine and the gut;
Then put on the powder enjanning char, and if it has moved, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed; And tie the thread, and be sure of the size, and the match; Then treat the wound as you would with others, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, then use this: make a poultice of the bowel, cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no other medicine in other preparations, the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound is not a principle member, then use light oil of tamarind or rose oil, and apply it to the edges, and dry the stitches;
If he feels pain or dryness in the bowels, and it happens many times, if the clyster of black wine is given, and at the same time the dryness comes to the intestines.
And the bowel is hard and sore, and it is lighter than the stomach when it is large.
The small intestine, which is called "young," cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the veins that surround it, as well as the subtlety of the entire body and its proximity to the nerves.
And if the gush of blood comes from the wound, and it is set in place as the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it becomes dark and turns black, and you must cut the black limb, because it has veins and arteries.
Then pull the joint that is between the bones, and hold the head of the arrow until it is fully pulled out of the wound, and then straighten the extraction point where the arrowhead bites.
Of the bursting of the belly
If the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were wounded or in the belly of a lance.
And the wound was at the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and contained the excrement and vomit.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop refining it until it was healthy, and I saw the result.
And when I see him suffering, I doubt that the patient has no harm in his belly. and he has no harm, but delays in better conditions, and eats and drinks.
and there is no one who says that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be treated in this way: first examine large testes, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when he has stretched his mouth over the wound, if she puts it with her lips, so that she draws back her mouth.
and then she covers the testis, and this remains if he cannot slip, then she causes another convulsion after in that way until the wound is completely closed. And the wound is counted.
If the intestine is caught in the abdomen, and there is no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a very fine thread that is sutured with the intestine of an animal, in this way:
Take the head of this intestinal thread that is free, and then tie it to the head of the other thread I lin thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and count the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
and this way of stitching is not worse than according to the course of love and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, then it is similar when it is in one of the intestinal grails, if it does not heal or become healthy, then it should be treated with caution.
from a fistula or if it is All wounds and abscesses, when they heal, are called 'fistulas' if they are completely closed, and likewise if they are small and rounded.
A fistula is according to the true node that needs to be hard and bluish, where there is no pain, and it is as fine as the tail of a pegasus.
And never in a clear leap bow, and at other times it is thick. Never in a small amount, and at other times quite.
And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed, and there is no pain, it is only due to one of the eight causes. This is to know, by the small pain of blood or grief. or because of malice. or because of the hard teeth, and the mouth, which does not leave it in peace. or he has too much bowel. or the food is spoiled, and the matter is of poor quality. or the medicine is not good in the cure. or because of the corruption, which is a plague. or because of the property in the region, which is slow to digest, and slow to health, and flees by nature. If he has veins or not:
And I have shown you all these causes, signs, and remedies for medicines in the division.
1. It is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistulas, which is performed by handwork.
Wounds that occur in all parts of the corpse's body; For he has fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; And if a part that comes from the proper member of the body is affected, and similar to it;
And all the fistulas of this kind are of painful healing, and there is only labor and ignorance.
And if there is no fistula that comes to the place where I have said it would, and you are a practitioner of the cure, and you see it occurring, then take a tent made of linen or iron, if you wish; if the fistula is straight.
And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a small tent made of linen or iron, because the threads will twist around the tortuosity.
And if the fistula is closed by hands and you do not find it well by tents, then search for the fistula by the other hand, because the moisture is cut from one part to another, and it is cleaned.
Then, if you are wise, you will know whether it is bone or flesh, and ask the patient to indicate where they feel pain when you press with your hand, and the limb where it is felt.
And when you truly know the limb and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or any of the limbs I have mentioned, if the couch follows what I have said, and the force and the crooked ones that are corrupt;
And then, when the wound is healed, and the fistula is well-made in the right place, if you press with the couch, as far as you can, then take fine tentacules of medicine ague, and insert them at the end of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that has been accumulated in the fund.
Then he puts antiseptic ointments on the healthy skin, as much as needed.
And if it is not healthy by this, then the cauterization is done as we have said, and if the part is corrupted by the fistula, then it is cut out.
If it does not hurt the nerves or the principal limbs, as we have said.
And if it is discovered that there is infection and blackening, and the patient remains as long as the infection is not completely healed, then the treatment of unhealthy skin ointments is done as much as needed.
And if it is not healthy, and the bowels are not relieved as before, you should know that you are not able to do this:
If the dislocation occurs and you are able to do so, and remove all the corruption, then restore the shoulder.
And if it is in good health, that is good. If not, you should know that the corruption is too deep, and you will not be able to remove it. If there is no other way but to cut it out.
If it is small and corrupted, and you can remove it with tweezers, if the instrument is suitable for this purpose, and if there are more, then remove them all.
And if the moisture is contrary to you, and there is no error, then cope with it and make it char, and deliver the bones.
If you do not cut the wound an hour ago, then put something to stop the bleeding, and leave it until the pus comes out of the bones, and then the bones will become lighter.
If it is large bones, such as thigh or knee, if you only treat the infection until blackness appears throughout the area, then restore the wound.
If it is a large part of the bone that has become corrupted and comes out of the bone. If it is necessary to cover and protect all the infected area and treat it as soon as possible.
and I will tell you of an example of a fissure that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can learn from it and help in your practice.
It was a young man who had a pain in his leg for many years, which was caused by the heart, so that the matter came to the leg, and he was swept away by a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it.
but they overlapped so much that the abscess was opened, and it corrupted with matter, and became a fissure, and there came out pus that all the bowels were torn out and the heart was full of moisture.
And for the first two years, and they received no knowledge in the art of hands, as long as I was called, and I saw their leg and the medicines used to cure them, and what died from the pustules of great pain. And it became red in the cheeks of youth, and had a yellow color.
I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the other part of the leg.
I thought furthermore, and in one of the pustules I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and decayed, and it came from the bone itself.
I was he who appeared from the corrupted bone, and I made sure there was no other corruption, since that was what I was.
And I began to restore the wound of soreness with long tents, and it could not be sewn.
Then I returned and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and it was decayed, and then I set the bone, and I thought about sewing the wound. but I could not cut through the bone so far that it would reach all its parts, then I restored it with medicines. And it was healed and sutured tightly, and I did not want to return to the operation because of the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him. For because the evacuation of blood is often, but it was completely healthy, and a hard stone was found in the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or contradiction at all, nor in the air nor coming out.
And if the bone is broken at any joint of the arm, then it should be set in this manner: Take two pieces of wood, and pull on them, and command that it does not extend higher than the top of the bone. And then put another piece of wood that is larger than the first one, and lie it across the bone, and hold the head, so that you can pull the broken end out of the bone, and cut the head off at the joint where you see it set, so that it does not break the head.
And then put a bandage or a table around the bone to cover the broken end of the bone.
It is necessary to soak as much as possible and can be seen and felt the corruption, and soak again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the environment or a part of it, if the cart is taken out completely.
Then put the incision in place, and then it is of one part to another the corruption, and the soaking water is long from the corruption pit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is cut, and it is the bone or it contains another part.
And if the corruption spreads to the continuation of the second joints, if there is no other enemy than cold;
If the corruption is in the fingertips or the toe, if it is painful there, but it must be that you investigate this corrosion as to how it opens; and it is made in all ways that you can think of, but the vein or the nerve will not oppose you;
and you ask that the incision and the soles cover these bones which are many, according to the seat of the bones and their appearance, and their bigness and their subtlety, and their growth and their diminution, and their hardness; And for this reason, it is necessary to adjust the appearance of each instrument of its kind.
And you claim that the work will show the instrument you will use, according to the knowledge of this art, and testifies the ways of the diseases. If you are not sure about the instrument you will use according to what is necessary for this.
The heads of the shoulders either fall due to denseness, or due to hardness.
And when you have cured the corrosion caused by the medicine, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the league or where the corrosion comes, if the malady is caused by death or by malice, which is greater, of the defect of the member.
When the signs appear that the limb becomes black, if it seems to be from burning heat, and then after turning black, it spreads to all parts of the member, causing corrosion.
If you feel intense pain, and it is due to the impact of certain beasts' venoms, like that of a sea scorpion and wasp, and the corrosion is at the tip of the member, and it does not come out easily with your hand.
And if it comes out easily with your hand, if the puncture is at the joint, if the corrosion does not come out easily from the arm.
If it comes to the arm, if the shoulder hurts.
If it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no way to save it except for the amount of its courage.
And so, when the corrosion comes or pain. If it comes in the first joint, if the shoulder is after the other joint.
If it comes with pain, if the shoulder has all the courage. If it goes up the leg, if the shoulder is at the joint of the thigh.
If it comes from the thigh, if there is no other way but to kill the patient.
1. And the way to cope with or soothe the member is if you tie it off and cut away some of the members on one side, and others on the other side, and then stretch out the cord that is between the two members at a wide spacing, as long as the bone is discovered.
2. Then the relief or soothe, and use of cloth, if it does not touch the healthy skin, and go to the surgeon for another wound and gangrene.
3. And if the evacuation of blood comes when you work, if you cauterize the skin hastily, or if you put on any restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, then tie the affected limb with a flexible bandage, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
and I will tell you what happened in my home in short:
it happened to me a blackness that seemed to be burning, and this corrosion came first in my little child's poop, so it consumed the whole of it.
And when I saw the corrosion, if it could cover the child's poop, and it was healthy:
and later when I returned with the corrosion or feces from the hand, and it came to me, and I did some things reflective after the purification of the corrosion, and it could not stop the corrosions:
I will try to pass my hand over it, and I do not expect any effect from the matter. And I doubted that if I cut my hand, it would not bleed because the strength of his arm was weak.
He then desperately returned to his land and managed to close his hand, and he was saved.
I did not have this story to tell because it is another matter, and it is their craft.
No one has ever had an aposteme in the wild boar, and it takes as long as it makes a great assembly of arrows. Then they are torn apart and pierced, and with a jump the bowels are emptied, and the patient is relieved of his pain, just as some slaves. And the skin that is covered is as soft as I plucked off hairs, and does not reach the bone or nerve, and such disease if called "healthy", but is actually called "fissure".
But if it is so long that it reaches the bone, then it is called "fissure".
And the skin if it is that you cut through completely, and at the same time when it is as soft as I plucked off hairs, just like some hairs. And do not let it remain for its corruption.
And if you are engaged and the hair is growing, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the hair is long, then the cure is to curl it:
Look at if the breasts are large, and the smell of the wound is unpleasant, therefore curl the breast with Egyptian medicine that has been made in this way: Take ashes, oil, and turpentine, and mix them together, then place the mixture in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey:
Then take this according to your need, and make it in the form of an ointment and honey, and cleanse the face, and draw out the pustule. And leave the medicine on for two hours, then draw it out by squeezing.
Do this as many times as the breast is swollen and the pus has stopped.
And never use an ointment of smoke until this medicine is present, and if you have ash from grape vine, and pour hot water over it, then let it drip, and when you see that the breast is well-swollen, cleanse it with the ointment.
And if the patient cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine does not quell it with fire, then the poultice of fire and honey should be applied, or there should be a little bleeding. Or you poultice with honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the wound aerated.
And when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well purified, if the poultice made with what is most suitable for the wound is applied, and it is not too hot, and they make it with rose oil and wine.
If you choose to cauterize with some medicines and ointments, which I have mentioned the properties or treatment of the ointments.
And if the wound is small, and the cautery does not enter, then enlarge the opening with a iron pin, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is smeared;
And if the wound is too large, then the cost and it leaves only the head or the cautery can enter, and if the wound that oozes blood is above, then the cup or more below the head than it is;
and if you do not hold your breath in such a way that the belly does not rise to the lowest part of the body where it is, because when the belly is empty, if it is not left alone to rest and you do not hold your breath in such a way that it appears in half the way: that the belly rises lightly and does not leave any of the belly:
that the belly rises lightly and does not leave any of the belly: and take consolidating medicines to make it better for the patient and they are put on the limb that covers all of the patient: Then cop the forces in a place where the wound is not too large, and they are stretched out according to the amount of wounds, and it is placed on the healthy wound to align the belly, and do not overdo it that it becomes too loose afterwards once.
And the one who is closest to the wound often overdoes it to stretch the belly, and checks what comes out of the belly, whether it's poison or too much or not enough, or undigested or digested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if it has gangrene or not, and when your medicine has been extended in some way and you see the nature of what jumps out of the healthy wound, if you check whether the breasts have already sprouted, and approach the health.
And then remove the dressing in the morning or at another time, and when you examine the wound, if you find a different layer, replace the ointment.
And if the venomous serpents are located far from the long tenses, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching.
For it has many methods of making incisions in its wounds, and those who do the opposite.
And if it is not digested, after a day, you may see that the nipples are hard.
And if the nipples are not digested, and they become hard, if you use wet medicines in substance and dry ones in virtue, as an ointment is defined, because it has a great part of sulfur, and this is the rear medicine.
1. Take defattening ointment, and apply it with rose oil, and the ash of white wine in substance.
2. Then preserve and use it.
3. And when defattening is made, and the honey is cooked, if the ointment is not present, or you take a knife and aloe and incense, and the broth, and the powder when it is in the fire;
4. And then apply the dressing, and it is kept in the breast, and never once does an aristocrat administer it, and roots of the blue lily, which is also like flour and cinnamon; 1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 1. Cut the, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it.
2. If the wound is long, and not cured by this cure, then you should know that the corruption has become established, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the joints. 3. If the cure of the fistula cure is as we have said before.
4. Paralysis is an abscess that often occurs due to the swelling of the thumb or little finger of the hand, or by chance in other fingers.
5. And when it is inflamed, and not taken care of, if it comes to an abscess, and runs and gets worse until it reaches the root of the thumb, or by chance it reaches all the way.
When the corrosion reaches the bone, as soon as pain sets in, and the head of the shoulder becomes swollen, and the color changes.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cover the whole excess that is cut off from the finger, and then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauterization is great help when the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy.
And if the joint is pressed, and it starts to prickle, and the pain increases, and you must remove the part of the joint that points the bone, and cut it high, and apply a little bit of the char subtlety and lightly, and put on the remaining part of the joint with medicines that are burning and corrosive to heal everything. Then the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy.
If corrosion reaches the bone, if it pierces and tears, for as long as the bone corrupts and is, it cannot heal.
If you see the bone corrupting, if it pierces and tears as said before, then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
If it is frozen, cut it off, and if it feels great pain, then it is necessary to first treat it.
Then cut the toenail as thin as possible when cutting across, and make sure the cut does not reach the quick, for the nail will cause great pain.
If something is found, then put something on it that soothes.
The shoulder dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is quite common, and often it does not move, and never unglues, and no one is born with this in any of us, or the birth is in none of our ancestors.
That which does not occur in any other part of the body, and that which is found at the dislocated joint, may be stationary by chance.
The size of that which is lame is such that it is lighter, in a certain way. The size of the lameness is such that it is like the root of a wide splint.
That which is found in the root of the joint is such that it is difficult to cure. If you hold your breath tightly.
In the event that you have to remove it from the back, if possible, first cover the hole with a piece of cloth suitable for this, then close the bone as much as possible.
The causes of these wounds come from birth, or from wounds, or from burning, or from similar things.
If the wound covers your breathing, then it must be repaired according to its natural forms. Then place between two tents or cloth pieces polished with oil rose, which do not stick. or you place between two soft pieces of linen, until it does not stick, as we have experienced.
When the patient feels no pain with their hand, it means that the treatment is effective.
The eyes are large and swollen full of melancholic superfluities, which come to more and more members.
and more come in the legs of those who go to pray and work and bear, than in others.
Therefore, it is necessary that you do not administer any purging of colic, and then the proper dose of the basilicon.
The cure of iron is according to two methods: 1. It is on the copper, and draws out the black blood; And if you wish to tie the vein, take all force.
The size is according to this method: First, heat the leg of a hot fire until it is thick and without being subtle, then stretch the leg gently towards the mid-thigh area of the groin.
Then, tie the vein in I, II, or III with a large size, then loosen and pull out the dark blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as you can without causing too much pain for the patient's wounded leg.
Then the patient is ordered to paint their skin with black ink.
And the evacuation and cleansing begin again when the veins are clear, and it is shown to the patient.
The inflammation of the wound is caused in this way: Raise the patient's leg if it has hair, then wash it with water, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red, and dilate the veins.
And if you don't have any water, then heat the leg with fire, and then cut the vein at the top of the thigh or in the arch of the ankle.
Then apply the leather to the wound, and scorch the wound in every part, as it becomes visible upon being touched.
and it appears red and black, and when it enters or the leather seems as if it were a gauze bandage.
then remove the glue, as soon as it is softened by the leather, and then press it lightly on the wound, and then cover it with another piece of leather, and then stitch it in three places.
then scorch the leather over the wound as it becomes visible, and then glue it to the leather as you have done, and then cover it with another piece of leather, as you have done previously.
Then comes another size, or several like it, then the gentle one, and the cop on the second size;
then the extraction of size by size, as it is all firm, then the cop;
and if you do not pull it out and lift it, if a needle pierces all the way through to the other end, and you sew and stitch, and pull out some thread, and turn your hand over and over again until it is done; and keep it from dislocating, for if it dislocates, then it cannot be pulled out or lifted, and it harms the shoulder;
And when you have treated it all, if you put on the leeway of the wound with fine-haired wool soaked in wine and rose oil. and keep it as long as it is healthy.
And if the eye is closed and swollen and covered over, and it is not straight as we have said, but if you cut it wrongly, do not cover it, but close it. and cut it as we have described.
The form of iron that is used to close the eye if it is curved, and does not cut too much, so as not to cut the vein.
And it is a large beak, because if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is its form:
This vein is surrounded by legs, hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and the earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it grows in another part than on the legs, and this comes from exudation of the hide, if it comes from the den of the snake and turns, surrounded between hide and char;
When the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes color, and the vein begins to bleed excessively, as if it were a root of a plant.
When the head is dislocated, if you wrap it around a piece of flesh from one and a half to two and a half inches long, and the nose, and leave the flesh on the leg, and all times when it is not deformed, if you wrap around the flesh and the nose;
If the dislocation is too far out, so that a part of it is left outside and wrapped around the remaining limb, and it is not covered all the way to its root, then it will cause further problems. For if you cover it, it will re-enter the body, causing abscesses and pus to form, and serious illness.
For this reason, it is important that it is treated promptly and thoroughly, and nothing or any part remains.
And there has never been a vein that did not become treated with your hands, whether it was X or Y, and some came to me who had X hands, and when you cover it, if it blisters or becomes infected, and the wound pains, then everything will heal.
1. And let the matter that is dense be seen, and the patient is given foodless medicines by the physician without any food, then the cure is done as they have with abscesses.
1. And never once is the vein hands wet, and at the same time when it opens in the joint or the other joint, and it comes out with a cough, and which falls out;
1. cure the patient as we have said before.
2. Those that are born between leather and hide 1. This disease is called in our land "beef disease," because it often occurs in cows, and is a sharp pain that goes from the skin to the bone, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt well at the member with the other member, until the skin or flesh is torn, and falls out;
and it is caused by excessive food of certain humors, if they come towards and are swallowed by worms and parasites and ascarids or the stomach.
and one doubts their malevolence, for when it goes through the course, it rises to the head, and comes to the oil, by chance enters, and destroys the oil. and this often happens.
when you see it being cured and drawn, if not able to be done when it will.
if it is necessary that you cut the bone and remove it, then sew it up and draw it out, and if it is placed in the fire-cauterized, as long as it burns.
and the most serious consequences that can occur if it is cut, as we have said.
and if you see it coming towards the oil, then quickly pull away from it, then cut off the tip, and pull out the needle.
and it is necessary to use the cautery of dissolution of drug solutions for the human body, and to avoid foods that cause indigestion.
From the pain that comes from winding. This disease is called "wakiri" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to no part of the body, and spreads from one part to another.
and I see what you say. I was called to attend to a woman in labor, and I saw her arms, and I saw a small knot in the vein of her arm.
and then, I saw it rise up as quickly as a snake to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as if it were live silver when it cuts through flesh.
The pain left that shoulder, and it turned into the shoulder, and then a little later, it spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
Then she told me that she dislocated her shoulder, just as I see it.
I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease to occur in this manner. Everyone, I want to ensure that the joint does not move with pain from one place to another, but I do not want to force it, if I see it in the woman.
I thought it was because the woman had tight clothing, and the veins were exposed, and because that constraint appeared;
and it did not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist clothing and veins restored;
And when you see the cure for this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it opens as we have said, if the ligament and the joint are tightened, and then hold it until that constraint in the knee is over; And cauterize the joint.
And if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of this which causes the ventrites, if like pills of slippery elm and pills of sassafras, and similar things.
Saiettes are various, according to their appearances and according to the hardness of the bones they pierce.
The variety of them is if they have sharp points, and small, and hairy, and soft. and of those that have two angles, and of those that have tails, and of those where there are parts.
And the one which does not cause pain in any member if it causes pain in two ways. Or if it causes pain in the principal member, like the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she does not move at all in any of these limbs, and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you later, you will see. If it is necessary to remove this arrow, as death follows in many other positions; and when you see that this sign does not appear, and the arrow is not in front, then pull it out, and treat the wound;
And the sign of fever comes when the arrow pierces the bone and shoots out of the socket, and the part where it was inserted is affected by scotomie, sode, esvertin, roujor of the eyes, enflammation and roujor of the tongue, spasme and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of the cole; And by chance, it lacks noses or ears. And by chance, the word and voice are lacking. And a white wound-like leap resembling a horse's neck, and such a jump like a horse's neck.
And this is the sign that appears, if you hold the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it is pulled out or left in is that it is close to the left cheek, and it seems as if it was stuck in something hard, not empty. And by chance, the arrow is also silent as the horse's neck, and with a dark wound, and cold and cold water comes, and the patient suffers. When there is no doubt that the patient has died.
And the sign of the eye that has not been opened is that there are no signs of swelling around the wound, and the throat is pale, and the patient's face is pale, and they sigh high and cry out in pain.
And if the shoulder is dislocated in the covering of the piss, then it is loose the small ribs. and great pain and suffering and gasping. and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the shoulder bone is dislocated in the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound, nothing of the undigested meat remains.
And if the shoulder bone is dislocated in the stomach, and it jumps point-blank through the small intestine, if there is no hope for cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if the shoulder is dislocated in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels great pain. When the wound is mortal.
The other member, if the face and chest and shoulder and arm and spine and back and ribs and muscles and legs, are safe according to other dispositions. When the artery is in the shoulder or the wound, and it is not visible, as I will tell you if I know, because you are doing this.
It happened to one man a arrow in the root of the thigh. I tried it, and from another side, I removed the fat of the ear, and it was cured without pain.
And there was a game of an arrow that fell into the grease of the oil of ozone and the paper of ozone, and the arrow was reponed, and could not be reached beyond the point towards the front, and it was the arrow very long like a Turkish bow, at all I made it light in weight for the ears.
I made the joint healthy, and no accidents happened when I moved it.
And there was an arrow in the neck of a horse, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears.
I knew the barbs, and very subtle when I translated it, and the horse was healthy.
And there was a wound on the man, which he thought was in his stomach or chest, and he thought he would die.
and then it had been XXX days, and if it had not been in its place. I opened the wound, I dressed it, and it healed, and there was no accident.
And if a man had a wound on his chest or back, and it was infected.
and the wound did not heal, and it did not adjust its natural positions, and it was not found in any of its natural works.
And if another man had a wound on his face, and it was infected. The patient will suffer greatly before the dislocation is treated.
Other similar cases may occur.
And there was an arrowhead in the thigh of the king's son, who had it for a long time and it was slightly inclined to the left side. The arrowhead was completely removed.
I was called for the treatment after it had been stuck for three years. If the wound is very tightly closed.
I tried everything subtly to find it, but I did not feel it. and he felt a sharp and painful sensation in his left ear.
I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead I had put in his throat, because he did not gag. I saw it was from an arrowhead.
I saw it was from an arrowhead. I placed the plaster on my hands, and dressed the wound on the right side, and it took a long time for the patient to feel the arrowhead enter his flesh.
And he told me. I applied the poultice of the corrosive medicine on my hands, and it was covered with a layer of plaster, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow that was stuck in the flesh.
Then I dressed the wound with the poultice of the corrosive medicine on the overturned plaster, and as the head of the arrow became visible to me.
and it takes well to the end in four months, and then the wound is healed if I have anchored the nails with my hands on both sides, and it cannot be undone.
Therefore, I will continue to refine and engineer ways of extraction, as long as I have the nails well made, according to how the form will be in the end of this chapter, as I heal and restore the wound.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage cannot be restored. Therefore, I will restore it, and the wound was soothed, and the patient's health was completely cured.
Or I said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your cure to what I will say, because the books cannot fully describe it;
but the skilled masters make good use of many small things, and of what is present and lacking, nine operations, and a variety of instruments, in the descent of things that are drawn in this art.
I say that the arrows do not come from the limbs or they are not cut off in two ways: or by the arm or they enter, or by another part.
and that which is cut off by the arm or it enters, is an arrow that has been inserted into the flesh, and it will never be cut off again.
If she does not leap now, if she leaves it as it is, and it becomes entangled in the hair, and the result is the injury.
And if she becomes stuck in the bone, and she cannot move, if she leaves it alone for no reason, and moves each joint;
And then she jumps, and if she does not jump now, if it is not cut deeply enough, as long as the bone is sharp, and then it will be difficult to remove;
And if the arrowhead is reset in the shoulder, and one cannot see it, if they want to try everything. And if you feel it, if there is no suitable instrument available.
And if you do not press for the wound's relief and for the shaft's removal, if it does not hurt as much as the wound is large.
When you pull the arrow out, and if it has ears (earplugs) that hold on, then break or crush the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out.
Even if you don't break the arrow, pull it out more firmly.
If you do not manage to do it once, if the patient is still resistant until the end, then pull out, because the extraction is painful. If the dislocation occurs against the joint, and you ignore what we have said about the cure in this chapter.
And you are wounded by the incision of the nerve and vein, and put your hand on it when you pull out the arrow more firmly, whether slowly or quickly, or firmly or gently.
And place the patient according to the form it was in when the arrow struck, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not, then follow what the sign shows you.
The arrow that came from another part, or it opened no thing of his, or the skin is shrunk in some place if you see or feel it:
Then measure according to size, as long as the thorns can take hold, and then extract: If it does not come now.
And if it is held in the bone, if you turn your round hand around as it enters the bone, until it expands the bone, then it will exit.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it and then resume the extraction as soon as it comes:
and if it is from the arrowhead and is stuck, it is cut at all strokes.
and if it is stuck, and you see the instrument being administered, if it is an instrument with sharp points, then the arrowhead enters the instrument's hair;
and then cut further, and if the arrowhead is hair, if it cuts the instrument at the tip entering, to lighten the extraction;
When the arrowhead is inserted, if it reaches the entire cavity or the venomous substance, then you must first treat the wound as best as possible.
And if the arrowhead is stuck in the belly, or in the stomach, or in the chest, and it is protruding, then you cover it with a cloth, it holds;
and keep the vein and the nerve, then extract, then clean the wound, it is easier. and the treatment as soon as it is healthy.
The shape of the arrows' barbs that are used to extract arrows resembles a beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
And there are several ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the abscess.
The pointed end of the hair is similar to the beak of a sparrow, to be inserted at the tip of the arrowhead, in the same way as this:
veins that are healthy are XXXI, but if there is a headache of XVI, it means: two bats that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbs". and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing. and two wounds that are in the two hairs, which are called "aspirations and the wound that is in the forehead. and the wound that is at the top of the head. and the two gouges that are out of col. and the wounds that are in the lips of those that are out of the mouth, and these are the wounds that are called "augeherich". and two wounds that are cut into the tongue.
The wounds that are usually found in one arm are five.
One is the temporal wound, which is on the left side of the chest, and it is called the "temporal wound" by the people. The head of the shoulder is called "fast" and is composed of thecephalic and basilar parts, and they call it the "bone of the shoulder". And if the basilar part is on the west side, and they call it the "shoulder bone", and it is under the fornix, and it is the one that is easily accessible, which is open clearly under the pouch.
And the savette is the vein that is between the auricular and anal, and if it rains.
And in the leg, and at the ankle, there are three veins: One is the corbier of the right ankle, and the second one is the suture at the left ankle. The vein that is called "nestle" is located in the ankle of the other leg.
In the other leg, there are three veins different from those.
The sinus of the veins that are after the ears can be helped by old catheters and drains.
And the quality of the sinus is, as I say, and it is that you remove the head of the patient, and wipe the foot or the veins are of a rough cloth. Then the patient's throat becomes red, as long as the veins are visible behind the ears and the two dependent on the head. 1. If you feel pain in your shoulder, and if you sense weakness in your arm, then seek help.
2. Then take the scalpel, and cut through the vein as close to the bone as possible, then gently hold the vein with your entire hand until it bleeds well, and then make sure the blood flows freely until you see;
3. Then stretch and hold it, as long as it is healed;
4. And I have already said the incision and fire cautery in the first book.
5. The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if they are old and hard, and if they have been blocked, and if they have been narrowed, and if the tears flow from them;
and you can judge its quality as being quite healthy if I say so: and it is that the patient pulls on his chest, until the veins open widely. and he feels the pain in his ribs, and then signs of enchantment.
then gently feel the pulse at the top of your ribs, and cut the thread below, and gently pull up the vein and the skin, as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to remove enough blood according to your need.
then relax the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it. And then the ligature is formed and left as long as it remains healthy.
And we have spoken of their strength and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
The health of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the health of the cranial bone, and it is affected by ancient diseases of the face, migration, and wounds.
And if the patient is in pain when the surgeon strains his neck while drawing the vein, as long as the vein is exposed. Then take the instrument called "forceps," whose shape is:
And place the tip on the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or another object, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see. Then loosen the cloth at the neck, and hold the vein until it is safe and never once with a wide flame.
Indeed, only the fire should be too large. and the safe way is to cross it, because the ointment is near, and by chance the fire may be too hot when it is subtle.
The safe way for the two veins that are in the two arms is to help the patient with the pain, and the bend, and the wound, and the urine in the oil, and many diseases of the face.
and assess the quality of their health if it is that the patient strains his neck by twisting any joint, as before.
then the healthy one, and if the patient has a long, narrow neck, because there is no cartilage. And if the neck is slender, by chance if it is broken.
then make a deep incision, as much as you can, and then cut the skin, and it heals well.
The vein of the healthy one is not weak if it is long and slender, and it does not cause pain or disease in the face, as does inflammation and rash that comes with age.
And the quality of the wound is considered to be good if the patient complains of pain in his chest, then tighten his neck in your left hand, and take a thin tweezer, and scratch off the eyelid in the eye socket that is between the two eyes, because the wound does not open well, and it will now start to close.
And do not push it too far, and close the wound according to your need, then let it rest one night, as it is quickly restored.
If the wounds of the two eyes help in the removal of the hair, and at the beginning of combing, and for many diseases, and empetigines, and corrosions, and herpes, and estiomenes.
and assess the quality of the health if it is that the patient strains his neck to one side or the other, as we have said.
and if the master is standing at the side of the patient's shoulder, and the patient is lying down, then the vein is long, then draw out a little blood, as much as possible;
then draw out another part in the other vein, then separate the limbs, and strain the veins gently, so that the patient does not suffer; and leave it until the morning, if the wound is healed.
Of the health of the deer The health of the teeth of the lips is aided in the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and cracks in the lips, and toothache and tooth loss.
And the quality of health is determined if it is necessary to make the patient stand before you, and tighten their neck as I have said. Then turn the eye, and look at them, of which one is on the left and the other on the right, and they are identified by their blackness, and by the fact that they have thin black lines.
Check one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then check the largest of each part, and do the same for all the eyes that are similar, because it is a different way.
Of the healthy tongue, the language The health of the veins that are open and long if helped after the healing of the head, and it is to the throat's scarcity, and there are diseases of the eyes, and there are diseases of the mouth.
and the quality of the health if it is that the patient suffers when the medicine is placed between one's hands in front of the sun, and the tongue is made to lie, and looks at each side of a black vein.
and the health is cured, and do not let it be too much, for it is the veins.
The veins that are commonly cured are healed in two ways:
1. If you prick it with your fingers, it will burn like fire, as sharp as a knife, and is called "anesil". 2. And they are wide and subtle according to the widening and thinning of the veins. The form of the fire cautery is such that it is named when it is first made, and it is wide as you see.
3. It has skill for opening flat veins with large clots of thick blood, and containing large clots and trouble. 4. And it is the form of the sharp olive-colored flame.
And it is more suitable for the subtle veins, and it is safer for the subtle veins, or if there is subtle blood clotting.
5. The health of the basilican vein, which is one of these veins, if helped with these diseases that are so bad for the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
The translation of the given line is: "And it is necessary for the healer to cleanse the wound and apply an antiseptic. The translation of the given line is: "And if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said. The translation of the given line is: "And it should not be pricked by the flame, but rather cut with a sharp blade.
The translation of the given line is: "And if the umbilicus does not open clearly, then it is necessary to pull on it and change another one. The translation of the given line is: "Or you want no rain on it, or you cleanse the vein with the blood from your arm. She opens clearly. And the cautery is applied to the fire, as we have said.
And if you see the joint of the arm become swollen, then it is necessary that you hold the arm firmly, and touch the joint as much as you can feel the pulse. Then signs for the joint to swell, and then hold the arm firmly, and cauterize the vein with fire. and be careful not to hurt the artery when you see the joint swell, because it is the artery. So do.
And if you see coming out from above like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, then you should know that it is not from the artery. Haste to you, and place your hand on the bone for a long time, then remove your hand without straining it, which has happened many times. Tie your arm, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient's shoulder.
And be still, and do not move until you are calm.
And if you are not straining it, and it does not work, and the doctor is not present, then the artery may open, as the head of the arrow returns. And do not strain it further.
And take a scalpel, and make it sharp, and take one of the halves and place it well against the other side.
If it is not stained, it is well. If it is not cleansed, if the cure involves powders that stain blood.
And the staining is not usually seen in other dispositions due to the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
The vein is in good condition if it can handle the flow of blood from the head and the wound, because it is composed of basilar and cerebral matter, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the patient to cut the nerve that is affected, and if it is not too long, and it trueves the nerve, and it swells and becomes unhealthy, and by chance it cannot be cured.
The shoulder bone is frequently opened, and if it does not open on its own due to its subtlety, then you should use the old instrument to open it. You should remove the shoulder bone from your pain.
And if there is blood between the two veins, if it is long.
The head aid if it helps, that it draws blood from the chief, and helps the eyes.
And you should help it by pressing on the olive or mint flame, because it is the safest of all wounds, because it does not harm the bone or the artery. In short, you should use a lighter instrument, and do not hurt anything the first time, and resume. And by chance, it happens to some men that they read it for the first time, but it causes no harm.
The quality of health depends on your thought.
The first thing you must know about health, if it is true that health is not a luxury but a means of keeping healthy and avoiding diseases coming.
and let the health be made in one of the three veins that are either free: It is to know, cephalic, faste, and basilic. And it is necessary to keep healthy at the beginning of prayers, and in dives and in swimming after having eaten, when the sign of fullness appears.
And it should be done on the first day or the second, after two hours or three days.
The one who is maintained in good health does not have a specific disease, but when it comes to eating or drinking, in all hours and at all times.
And it is not necessary for children of twelve years old to be more healthy, nor for women who are only four months pregnant. Nese should not be made healthier than those who have passed 60 years.
And if some appear to be healthier, in whatever way that may be, if they cause the small intestine of a light clyster to become inflamed, if there are many feces retained, then the vagina does not have the small intestine as unnecessary and harmful members.
1. No meat that is too fat or too lean, and no yeast, whether it is or not, and no drugs.
2. And if it is after a passionate attack of colic, and vomiting, and disorientation of the stomach, and frequent urination in women, and travel, and awakening and dining, and all the virtue, or by something of the arm or deep wound;
3. Then refine the humors, if it is not too large, by meat and drink and medicines, if you can afford it;
4. Then enter or bathe, nothing will help, by refining the humor, and make yourself healthy from the vein to the third part, as we have said;
and keep that day of work, and pain, and pleasure, and similar things.
and be close and attentive, and keep the healthier ones higher than those we consider healthy, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently draw the limb away, for if it is too swollen or small, it cannot be corrected without.
and then rub the shoulder with hands until the veins throb and are felt.
then apply the healthier oil to a small amount of oil, then place your left hand on that vein on the shoulder as far as it can go without causing pain, so that the vein does not break or weaken from injury.
For there are veins that run like strings in the healthier ones, and if they are many like those of wind, then when one is placed over the fire, if it withdraws from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those; And if it opens the vein, then there is too much swelling in the wound, because then it is necessary that the healthier ones are informed about these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good. And if not, then it resumes a little later in the same place or suddenly, if it is not bent.
If it is found to be shortened, and the patient becomes anxious, allow it to remain for one or two days, and do not tie the arm. By chance, aphthae (canker sores) appear on the tongue.
Do not enter water or bath, and if it pleases, restart the cure.
And if the wound is gnawed, or it is not cut subtly and you doubt that there is as much blood as you see, then be afraid of that wound yourself in all fairness.
And the wound does not heal quickly, unless the patient is shortened. For there are often times when the wound is small.
If you see the skin swell, if you do not rekindle the health, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the corset of the blood, and makes it dry in this part of the skin that the oil is on.
and keep oiling the skin as often as you heal the wounds, because it strengthens the course of the blood.
And this same thing helps to relieve and strengthen the limb that is oiled. If you are careful not to spread it too much when it is too thick.
If there are large abscesses that often recur, and at the same time the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and wet a soft sponge in cold water and wrap it around the leg, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no swelling or darkness or discoloration at the leg after a few days, then you should not be concerned. And if you see, do not apply any aloe or rind of milk of almonds, or similar.
And many times there have been cases of gangrene and appearance in the health of the basilica:
Then place your hand on it, and if the limb is painful under the pressure of your hand, that is the appearance. However, do not put anything on it other than what we have said, for by chance in the cut without damaging the artery.
but apply it dry to strengthen the limb, then continue with another treatment until it is healthy.
2. And apply to every pain according to its quantity of virtue and color of the poison.
For if it becomes black, do not let it stay out as long as it is red. And if you see it get big, do not let it stay out as long as it is subtle. If it is too hot, then let it cool down.
And it is good for the one who is in pain and in need of extraction, and has the skill of extracting blood, then widen the wound more, and make the flames wide.
And for the weak, I do the opposite, and it is healthier to cut often and not to prick, and it should be done with a sharp blade.
And this way of healing is saved from the spread of blood and the strengthening of the nerve, and it is better that the long wound does not become wide.
And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is good to give a thin bread dough in the juice of green apples. If it is sweating, if three drops of blood are drawn or four If it is of cold complexion, if before the sick person eats well-milled flour mixed with honey, or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-odored syrup.
And if he feels better after vomiting, after the evacuation of blood, it is necessary that he drinks charbroiled honey and a subtle scented honey, and uses other things as we have said in the division or chapter of sincope, for the evacuation of veins.
If he sees his arm swelling again, and becoming more so, if it comes to that, when he is overcome by great weakness, which he gains a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
And if he sees his arm swelling again after the first time it was weak, and he feels strong, if he is strong seven hours after the first time he was weak, or after the second hour.
And if he feels strong from another part, if he should become stronger on the second day or the third.
For it has a thirst for blood that is already sweating, which brings on fever. If it comes to draw large amounts of blood, and clean the wound as much as possible. Then since you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the wound as soon as it is healthy, so that the death does not come from the wound of the pimple, and this happens many times, when the healthier ones are neglected.
When you see the arm slip from its place, and make it bleed the second time, and the wound is closed, then you must press on it. If the arm is swollen, extend it gently, as this would be harmful.
but let it remain until the second time it has swelled. or you do not touch the point of the flame, as long as the part that is frozen does not bleed from the vein until it has bled, and then put on wet bandages and return to fire, and gently press on it.
If the vein is inflamed, and it is not held steady, until the abscess is relieved.
If it is necessary to draw the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
The arm is healthy because the vein of the shoulder is not affected by the dislocation.
And the way to heal if the patient's hand is burned with hot water, as long as the redness remains.
Then it is tied loosely, if the vein appears well, then the proper way to do it is to make a small incision, not too wide and not too long.
And let the wound be wide, and be well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, then put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood flowing until you have enough.
And if this is not enough, then do not put the hand in hot water again, because it will be more inserted than before.
The soreness of this wound is safer than all others, as it has not been pierced or cut.
The health of the saved hand is such that it can cure all stomach ailments, and this is how:
strain the hand, and pour hot water over it as long as the vein is not visible, if possible. and if you can cross it, and cover it all over, if it does not hurt at all.
and do not make it too hot, because the flesh is dry and without warmth, and then put the hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
And when you have treated enough blood as is necessary for your skill, if you put the vein oil and seal it firmly, and then do the same to each vain.
The patient with the hand on the left side is suitable for treating mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said for the right.
The health of the gallbladder is suitable for treating all diseases that are poor in the chest, such as diseases of the lungs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the arms and legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its cure if it is that the patient's hand is bathed in hot water and the vein is cleaned as much as possible, and the joint is rubbed around the wound. If the vein is near the ankle, and there are many wounds from rain.
If the wound is small or large, or near the ankle, it is worth considering.
And if you consider the wound, if there are nerves that are exposed, and the pain is severe, as well as crawling;
and the old scars should be considered.
And if you cannot remove it, then put your hand in cold water, and let the wound dry well.
And if the pain worsens the first time, but returns in a second pore, because the lesion is salty;
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and I will make a poultice of the other ankle.
The pain in the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the foot, and its cure is the pain in the knee, when it is full of blood.
And the quality of its health if it is that the patient enters or bathes, and strains the ankle IV times in twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
And if it opens, if the healthy person is in all ways that you can, and across. And it is worth copying if the patient is well, for the leech is safe, and it is replied to by human hands.
And it is worth copying if the patient is well, for the leech is safe, and it is replied to by human hands. And if you do not copy, if the healthy person has no one who opens or does not open, and goes to the small toe, and you wear out the nerves.
And make so much evacuation of blood that you see, and then let go of the ligament, and put on cotton and strain. The patient is now healed.
Vacuum pumps are made of horn, or iron, or glass;
and vacuum is created in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
And this vacuum is created by cutting in two ways: either it is at full heat, or by heat.
and the vacuum created by cutting and extracting blood is made in twelve hours of the sun's course, with some being all at once. And the other is left in place. And two more in the other cheek. And the suction of the mouth; And the suction of the other two shoulder blades; And the suction of the groins; And the suctions of the inside of the arms; And the suctions of the legs; And the suctions of the ankles;
And the suction does not treat any blood, for it is scattered throughout the body, and therefore there are no veins that are not affected, as we do with wounds; And only then is it necessary that she be anesthetized, without any fire or sensation of fire, in no disease that comes from overload, as long as the heart is dry;
And if necessary for diseases, or due to habits, if the midwife attends every hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in every ten;
For there are those who, when they have to assist at childbirth, have heavy heads.
And if there are those who, when they are full and have a fever in their face, in their head, and in their neck, and are pale;
And those who have a chill in their mouth, their tongue has swollen, and they spit out blood. And if there are those who feel weak, see signs of fever, cold, and other symptoms.
When we saw these signs, and at the same time when the month was over, we commanded them to fast for three hours after noon.
The patient with the infected eye seeks help for the pain caused by the eyes watering and the swelling... only after all the pus has been drained.
If the ventilation is in the head of the infected eye, and it is only used by those with a cold complexion or those who have been crying, as this can cause significant harm.
Therefore, only the watchman should use ventilation, and those who have or are suffering from head colds.
And those who often get better, if they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the ventouse a little further down due to the fear of oblivion.
The ventilation in the neck of the infected eye and the base of the skull is used for relief from pain, and to reduce swelling, redness, and inflammation.
The patient is instructed to bind it loosely, as it tends to tighten too much and cause discomfort in the stomach or chest and heart.
The patient suffers from chest pain and shortness of breath, which worsens with exertion, causing the heart to palpitate and the jaw to ache, and leading to toothaches. It is an indication of the disease of the basilica.
It is recommended that you instruct the patient to express his hand when putting on the bandage, so as not to cut the artery and cause hemorrhaging.
The patient experiences pain in the neck if it is caused by a disease of the mouth, oral corruption, and similar diseases that affect the mouth. And it is in the gums of the second lower lip.
The windings of the shoulders are worth the disease that comes from chlor and swelling.
The ventricles of the throat are worth as much as the third veins of the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins.
And command the patient not to do too much, for his lung is empty of air and knows how to compress and arteries.
The ventilator that is in the chest is worth as much as the foundation of the body, and has diseases, and it must be large and deep, with a good ability to breathe. And by chance, if it is too subtle, it will break. I cause great pain.
The abdominal pounds are healthy when they open widely, for they attract blood from the entire body, and alleviate old pain from menstruation, childbirth, and bladder issues, and relax the muscles.
They are in the legs of the II soles and the II heels, and they make the body weak after long use, and cause pain in various positions.
The way to set the abdominal pound is to first empty it, and then continue until you see the redness and swelling, and the appearance of the bruise.
Then, firmly place the forceps, and prepare in the position of the corsets, as some have such large shoulders and narrow chests. It is recommended to wound once only, and make wide cuts, and a small amount. and gently lick.
And if it is not thin, if it is wounded twice: the first time by making the vein thinner for the large amount of blood.
And if it is not very swift, if it is wounded a third time:
And when we want to draw out small veins frequently, we only do it once. And if we wish to draw blood, if we often return.
And if we wish to draw blood, if we often return; and if it is not swift, then it is finished if the vein is perceived to be sore, and those who have thick skin and are hard, and who have large pores, you should cleanse the handles of the oily, dissolving lamps. If it is in this manner, of olive oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of the seed oil of cucumber.
And if it is in this way, of ivy oil, or of lily oil, or of chamomile, or other such likeness.
And if the excess is large and cold, take warm oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and apply it.
And if the skin is dry and large pores, it is not recommended to apply oil, but it is recommended to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or violet water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
And if the mouth is dry, if it rises from honey, or rose water, and summer, and similar things.
And those who have excessive abundance rise from wine vials, or of ague of ailments, or of decoction of anet or of chamomile, or of other such things.
And they do not become more healthier by ventouche before the bath but after the bath an hour or two;
And they do not sleep much after ventouche, and they become weary when they should be ventouched and when they are ventouched;
And if those who are healthy are cooled, and if without them they are too hot and inflamed; if it happens that they crave cold things, such as pomes grenates and endives and laitues at the dairy, and similar things; And remove pus, and charred flesh, and moist meat.
And remove pus, and charred flesh, and moist meat. And those who have a cold complexion, if they suck honey syrup and sweet wine that is between wet and dry, and remove pus and small pieces of skin and pimples, and
and when it starts to rain, if it must drink more than water.
And it is necessary to give some men no time of trial or massage before the wind, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs. And make them subtle, but only those who are thirsty should drink.
1. The instruments that are put in to cause pain are those that are put into the liver, and the stomach, and gout, and the intestines and bowels and veins and bones, for this member does not suffer from external injury, and it is only caused by drawing blood from one part to another, as we do with the breasts when they are sick.
2. to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we do with the breasts when we take out the abscess from the belly and the bowels to relieve the member.
3. and to relieve the pain, when it is inflamed or pierced, if it is relieved by its own virtue attracting the inflammation, or if the piercing is separated from its limb.
When the patient is placed on the stomach and the chest, and when it has been retained, these ventouses are administered empty by sucking only. And never have been administered hot fire, and never plained of cold decoction, as in such diseases that cause pains, and in this manner we fill the ventouse with warm water, or with cold water if it has been cooked with useful herbs.
The form of the vacuum administered by fire is:
And it has two large and half palm of the hand, and it has one cost on the little puss, as if to poke an aguille, and it is of wax, so that it does not stick to the patient's member.
And in a certain environment, there is a way across iron or steel, using a wedge, and these are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
For the umbilical cords of children are not like thicknesses, and neither are they fat.
And should one insert this umbilical cord into the member?
Take the wedge of clay or grease, and insert the umbilical cord through the hole of the wedge that has been inserted into the wedge, so that it is clear at the end of the wedge and does not burn the patient.
Then it is placed on the member, and your wounds must be seen if we have said, so that if you see, if there is fever, and if you ventilate.
Then apply the liniment as before, and often resume it, if you have skill.
In the ventilated room, which is for the treatment of coughs and colds, there is no fever or cough, and it is not infected only when it is plain with a cold, and it is placed on the member only so much.
And this is the form:
Wounds are not infected only when they are in the limbs where it is not possible to ventilate due to their small size, like the lips and genitals, and they look like these. And in the case of dislocation, if it is not treated promptly, and other similar cases.
And the quality of the user if it is that without water that are in soft drinks, if they are taken;
And they are given a nut in soft water, as long as they are not pregnant, and have no children in the belly; And then it is cleaned and dried, and then the limb is washed as much as it is red, and the wounds are dressed;
And when they will be flat and smooth, if it is the joint or can be dressed, it is put in, because this is after;
If not, then lift the leg of ease, and then of pain, well, and then stretch it.
And if it feels too tight after the corset of the stays, if I am cold and wet, and put on, as long as they are not stretched.
And if the stays are multiplied, if you put on vitrol or gas, and similar things, as long as they are stretched.
Or if you put on the leg half of picked walnuts, and leave them as they cool to the leg, it will now stretch.
And if you have more of these, if you take others.
If the wounds do not take on the salve, if you rub the wound with warm oil or insert a needle as much as it does not hurt, and then put it on, and as they feel the heat, if they burn.
and when you see that they are smarting, if you sprinkle on a little aloe and silk, or charcoal, they will now burn.
2. This is the beginning of the book of wounds. 3. These cauteries are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are a restoration of wounds and dislocations.
Tell them, that the leaf will make the patient's skin smart from this chapter, that they will never see any of the old books, nor letter will come out.
and for this reason, the science is neglected in our land, because I have never found any book.
and no one knows otherwise, for it is by the science of ancient books, or because I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and condensed at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the strangulations that are mistaken, as I have done in these two previous chapters before.
1. It is therefore necessary that we say the introduction of this book, the words and chapters, and the surgeons understand their meaning, and they should pay attention to the truth, so that those who have experienced it and learned this noble art can teach others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or twisting occurs in no way, if you must first heal the patient on one side and the other, nothing else can help, just like how it is with wounds, or tumors, or galls. If the joint is not very tense, or too loose.
If the joint is too loose, it is known as cold joints, and should not contain any fatty tissue, no thin charcuterie, and no excessive consumption of meat that fills the veins with blood, until you do not doubt aposteme chaut, nor expansion of matter in the member.
If the patient's condition improves after using the treatment.
When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient's meat that causes great swelling, or if it has viscosity, like wheat cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made of wool, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For the swelling decreases and the fracture is less soon.
And you know that bones broken by fractures and decrepitude cannot be well restored or surged according to their nature by the care of the members, nor those who are too soft, like small children.
But there is no cure, first reset the broken bone and large fragments that are pulled out and join the limb together as much as possible, just as it was before. And do not pull too hard on its work, and because it causes great pain from large meat, as we have said.
The treatise explains that there are various types of fractures, each with its own characteristics and causes.
However, the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will explain all types of fractures in this chapter. There are fractures that occur when falling, and others that result from being struck, similar to the size of a quill used for writing.
There are fractures that occur when falling, and others that result from being struck, similar to the size of a quill used for writing. If a fracture is accompanied by a wound, it can be a small cut or nick.
And to have his engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes to his memory in his head.
And it is known the bone fracture by what causes it to be twisted, and wide open by defense, and some by pressure of the hand.
And when it is not twisted and does not touch the toes, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may have knots, or roughness, or a small break. If you cannot move it with your hand alone, but apply the medicine that comes after, and then gently pull it now.
And you suspect that the fracture will occur in the fall, and the two parts of the bone are separated, it is now necessary to align them as evenly as possible, without causing further injury.
and if the bone is set, and it does not cause any pain, as long as the pain is eased.
Then you should align it gently and carefully, and suspect that the restoration of the bone is lighter than the restorations of other bones or if there are fragments.
And then hold it steady until it is done.
When there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is two parts, it is hands or foot, or in your hand it is some small limbs, or in the cords, or in one cord and in your hand;
and put the member in its natural position, if by the parts of the broken member they are out of place, then reset them with your fingers in the joint that you see, and make sure that by your effort there is no injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust the two heads of the bones as well as the best forms;
And it feels good in the hand if it seems that it is not well done:
If the swelling improves nicely and is not strained too much, do not press as hard as those who cause it to come out through their abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is swollen, if the patient is careful not to move it too much, neither during the day nor at night, nor in any other way. And be well that the limb is firmly bandaged to ensure that it does not feel any pain. For if there is no pain, and it is not swollen, then it is necessary to put on clothing that does not cause any pain.
And be well that the limb is firmly bandaged to ensure that it does not feel any pain. For if there is no pain, and it is not swollen, then it is necessary to put on clothing that does not cause any pain. and keep it straight, so that twisting does not come when you restore it.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
It is known that the broken member can be different in size and shape.
For it has many limbs, just like fingers and toes, and similar ones. if it is covered with flax and wool of a fineness and subtlety such as. and those that are thick, just like a knot and a leg.
if they are covered with a thick and hard linen, because the large linens wrap around the whole limb, and they are drawn equally from all parts, if it has no tension.
Then the hand is lightly tourniqueted with three or four turns around the member, and the hand is stretched a little for the entire length, then it goes to the end of the fracture and is stretched less than the fracture, which the fracture slightly moves away from the break;
and softens the ligament a little and a little, as you grip a large part of the healthy member, then take another ligament, and turn it rightwise over the broken member;
Then go back to the part opposite the fracture, and stretch it gently, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first lesson;
Then insert the threads between the stitched lines of linen or drapery, as it is even, then tie them with silk and braid, and then put your well-made eyes on them, if there is no slippage or fraying.
And if there is fraying or slippage, then put something calming for slippage on it, and that stops the fraying, and leaves no uneven parts.
Then tighten your eyes, and be of one and a half inch wide, rough hemp, or fust that is used for nails, or rings of palm, and be like this figure:
But it is necessary that the piece that is placed on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others.
and should also be long enough to fit the member of small or large size. Then pull on the strings as you did in the first session, then tie a thread around it, just like in the first session. The more it is stretched, the less it is.
And it is necessary that the thread be clean, not too thick nor too thin, and be made of linen thread.
Because if the thread is too thick, it is like the works of the foxes who make their lashings of linen threads, and it is a great mistake, for the lashing cannot be equal if it is too fine, and only serves to have less space between each string.
And if the patient is dislocated due to the hairs of the eyelids after plucking them in good health, if they make holes in the skin, or cause inflammation, if it does not bleed.
When the wound is with the forceps, and the nail is broken, I will tell you the cure for this afterwards.
And he should not try to straighten all the broken limbs at once. For when the limbs are large, it is not proper to put on tight clothes that will afterwards cause pain after six or seven days, or according to your aposteme's strength.
And then the way of ancient plasters to restore breaks, dislocations, and torsions:
And is that you make a dough that holds within the walls of the mill, and knead with much beer, and make this confection, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore breaks in other positions, and even women and children, for it is not too hard or too wet.
Another way to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: Prepare a mixture of oak bark, linseed oil, and Arabic gum, and mulat; mix it with X parts of water. Mince the ingredients and aloe, mix it with X parts of water. Add aleochil in the mixture, X parts of water. Then make a powder, and mix with pork fat. If the complexion of the skull is hot, then use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Other method of plaster that is used: take mud and mix it with water, then let it dry for about 12 hours. grind and add aloe, then let it dry for about 79 hours. mix with ice for about 6 minutes. mix with arsenic (armenicum) for about 10 minutes, then boil well and cook with water or urine, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones is to take the bones out of their sockets, soothe the pain, and make them fit, and the fractures heal. take new gauze, mix it with oil and cooked butter, and put it on the wound.
2. These plasters do not repair anything, but they are useful for soothing abscesses and properly addressing bone pain.
Another way to fracture that restores broken bones: Use dried figs, and dry earth pottery, break them together, and make a splint.
4. Another plaster to repair the bone fracture and to help heal the abscess: take dried fig leaves and earth oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster. Use the root of valerian, chamomile, violets, flour of wheat, of each a part.
and boil, and mix with wine, and when the members are washed, mix with fresh coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Another way to plaster more forcefully than the first, when an abscess is coming out of the member. Use the roots of valerian, linseed, honey, honey, and violets and chamomile, of each a part. And cut, and bind with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras states that no material is used to set a broken bone for restoration, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
It appears that Galien suggests that when setting a broken bone for restoration, one should use dry things like cheese, mirrory aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to detect injury and pain: Take raw and cooked oats, or wool from sheep, and glue, and cut them evenly, and bind, and then apply it and hold it in place.
And then take a pouch afterward, and keep an eye on the patient's pain does not feel any pain, and does not move the bones of his arm. if not taken by hand. If pain comes to the limb, or itching, if you touch it, and it swells, and now the plaster is loose.
and gently loosen it, and use wet seawater, and dip in cool water, and raise the swollen limb as much as the itching stops, and soothe the pain. Then rest the limb for an hour, then put on a dry bandage, smooth with water or olive oil, and tie tightly until you are sure there is no sign of gangrene.
and reduce the inflammation of the swollen limb, and soothe the pain, then resume gently tying with a small piece of plaster, and a little emplasater, and do not strain it too much. And gently as long as it is healthy.
If you see that the wound is bleeding, swollen, painful, and inflamed, and you have the skill to plaster and bandage, if it recurs, as you did initially.
And if nothing comes to the member that we have said, if it does not slip after three days or four or seven or ten. And never leaves it for twenty days, according to what we see, as long as the fracture is healing, and approaches the joint of the cart.
However, the restraint is more than the first, and its flesh increases as I have said before.
And if you see the shoulder drying more than it should, screams that no one can come. The first line of the text translates to: "When the fever rises, you must wash your face several times a day, regardless of the time.
The second line translates to: "By this means, the swelling in the member is reduced, and the pain subsides, restoring the member to its natural state.
The third line translates to: "This is unfortunate, and if it persists, I can only recommend rest and proper care.
The fourth line translates to: "There are many types of wounds, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
The fifth line translates to: "For there are wounds made by the impact of a spear, and they pierce the entire bone, just like a thorn or a nail. For this reason, it is called this method of fracture "hair-cutting".
The speckled bone is cut through by various senses, and this method of fracture is called "absolute".
And the wound from these two great or small fractures is.
And if it is made by a thrust that is embedded, or cut, or by the edge of a pierce, or by the point after a pierce, or by other such means.
If there is a persistent wound, which approaches the skin that is exposed to the bone, or it is under the bone, and this is the injury or large or small.
And if the wound that is repaired in the bone is as fine as some needles, and is a small cut, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
And if the wound that is made by cutting with a sharp object, or by piercing, or by some other means, and causes the piece of bone to enter, and it is called the "hotter" when they heat the hotters; If it enters the wound.
And there are more who have moist hair, like children's hair.
and come in all these ways of fracture that are lightly cut if like these; and I will speak to it in its own language.
And let's examine all the ways of fractures by the methods used, and by the corrupted char that is used.
The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone, and rubs it with a cloth, if the dark fracture is not wide open.
In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close eye on the patient's condition, and if you see no serious complications, such as vomiting, confusion, apathy, muscle relaxation, fever, and redness, and other symptoms that cannot be cured, seek medical attention.
If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you expect a cure to begin.
When the bone comes first to you, and it is in your hand, if it is necessary to cut the bone before the fortieth day, then you must.
If it is in this way, if you have cut the bone before the ninth day, then the wound that we have mentioned will be corrupted and the accident will come.
And if the bone fracture comes near the edge of the skin that the scar hides, then you must cut off the damaged part.
And if you burn the patient's hair as it grows, and cut along the bone in all ways you can, and along the shape of the wound more so than you can, and to reveal the bone, or to expose the muscle, and if you help with this that you can, and then fill the wound with oily powdered flax. and make the wound rest as long as the inflammation is eased, and be assured of its correlation with blood. then the bone begins to erode, and it is done according to two methods of incision:
one method is when you cut at the narrowed end, and it is formed like this:
And then, a larger piece is cut than the first one.
And the second method is when you have many different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron:
and you perform them lightly, so as not to cut the head.
And if the bone is hard and thick, then you must perforate it from the inside, otherwise, you should make holes with smaller drills, and do not let the point go further into the bone, and it must have a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to go further into the bone:
And you should have more of them if many people have this condition when their bone grows in their shoulder, if you have tried everything for your test.
And it is the form of the three ways of trying:
The quality of piercing into the broken bone is that you put one try on the bone and turn it as much as you can until you feel that the bone is perceived.
Then I put the try on another part of the bone, and then I do everything, then cut as much as you can with the incisors of the bone that is between the plugs, and do it as subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as long as you draw the bone from your hand, or from any of the splints that you have like nails, pincers.
and keep your hands away from the skull and the face.
When you perceive the bone, and treat it, if you cover that the worn-out plate of the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but it should be more fine and delicate than the other incisor.
and if there is no wear on the small bones, neither any scales, if the light bones are slightly affected by the strains. then treat the wound and injuries that we have mentioned.
And another way of treating it is what the Gaulish doctors say, which is more certain. And the loud one, very much so, and that is his word. It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and bleeding. Once you have removed this part, measure from the edge of this incisional lenticular loop, of which the shape is:
And do not cut too much of one part, and the other part becomes in two pieces, so that when it is cut, it is towards the bone.
Then, with a small tool, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and you will be well prepared for the cloth that is loose.
If it is near the bone, if you lightly touch the bone, because one touches the bone painfully and with fear.
When the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only covered by soft tissues, and it has small pieces, if they cover that roughness, and smooth the scales with a subtle rasping tool that you must have several quantities of, to adapt each limb to its use according to the type and position of the fracture.
If you shave in front of a coarse rasping tool, and then switch to a softer one, and continue doing this as much as it is necessary.
In every other small incision and subtle break, it is necessary to amputate according to his address.
And that is something that cannot be answered by the one who has studied in this art.
And if the scar is discovered, then it is necessary to apply oil on linen according to the size of the wound, and the ointment is put on the wound. Then take another doubled strip of linen, and the ointment in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first strip. And do this more gently than you please, so as not to worsen the scar, then apply with another piece of linen, and do not strain it too much, only as it will tag the wound.
And let it stay in the bed for one or two days, until the inflammation is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of various kinds, flour, and powdered incense, and Aristolochia, and similar things.
And make powder from these things and place it on the wound, and administer further medications without biting.
And ensure that the wound is clean, do not apply ointment, and do not gather bows, because when bows are assembled on the skin, they often cause great pain to the patient.
For when something biting is placed on the skin, it may cause harm. If no accidents come to the patient, if no one doubts, as we have said, if there is any doubt in sense.
And if no color comes forth but through medicine we have put on, which has some virtue, then it is necessary to apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and then place it on the skin. Then the treatment is in various ways that cover the wounds, as long as they are healthy.
Scars that have never been broken in the two parts of the skin, or only one, are because they are bones.
And that is cartilaginous, and does not break easily, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off the small toe or nail and make the break as equal as possible on your index finger, and in the pocket until it matches its natural figure. and do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your operation.
If the break is in the middle of the nail and cannot be reached by the thumb, then you must place it evenly at the tip of a large pocket.
And if the break is of two parts, then you should redo it, and hurry to restore the first joint, if possible.
And if this is not possible, then after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound has stopped bleeding, cut off the small toe and nail, if the break is in one part.
If you cut one part, the other will also break. and if they are too large, they fill the abscesses with pus.
And no restaurer will say that one must smooth the wounds with a blade, and each day. It seems to me that this is the best, but they should be made in the composition of mull, and oatmeal powder. Then leave the dressing, until the bone is firm and the cartilage becomes hard.
And no time is lost in putting sheep's gut in the wounds, and if the skin is loose and hangs down, and holds tightly, and smells the salves among. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And if the swelling comes to the eye while you are working, if it is made of wool or cotton that has been greased with oil of rosemary, or in a pot of vinegar.
And if the abscess does not heal, apply plaster made from flour of sisal, incense powder, and lamb's wool ashes, then place soft sponges on it, and do not tie it too tightly.
And if the wound is small and it is torn into thin pieces, and the tearing is done with suitable instruments, then cauterize, and treat the surrounding things as charred, and swearing, if burning and cauterizing are suitable for this.
And if there is no wound or small wound, and the patient is cured by tenting, and puts on bandages, as soon as it is healthy.
When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is slight only, and not in two pieces, but rather a thin crack, which can be felt, if one knows how to do it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the left side, that you bind your index finger in the mouth of the midwife. And if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then bind your index finger of the right hand with your left index finger, lightly bind the fracture, and fix it with the other hand in place.
And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described as a second degree, then it comes that you administer extension of two parts, as long as it is even.
And if the teeth move or break, or if they are pulled out of a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put the thread on the broken jawbone, and put two sheets over it. And put on the patient's head a well-made cap, or a piece of leather that is long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it to the neck that you choose, and instruct the patient to rest, and give them light food.
And if you see that the joint changes shape, if it shifts during the night, and then return to the point where it was previously; and apply a poultice on it, with flour from the bolster or wheat flour, after you have applied the mustard to the head;
and place the poultice on it, with a light bandage, and if it becomes wet, let it dry completely before changing the dressing, as long as it remains healthy; The patient's condition improves after three weeks.
And if the wound becomes inflamed, then we have said many times what to do about it.
If there is a fracture and wound combined, the piece of bone in the joint is reduced. If the bone has subtle projections that are flexible to this.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it according to your needs.
And when you have all the pieces of bone, and there is no need for them, if the wound is wide, and place them in removable dressings as needed, until it is healthy.
The force breaks more often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways.
Or it is broken and displaced in two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore.
Or there is a fracture with wound.
And the operation is when the fracture is near the wound, if you have two assistants, so that one marks the helper who feels the force of the fracture. and he extends the other arm towards the part.
then place the incision at your own side, as it should be, and make sure there are no appearances or movements.
And if you must extend further, then place the shoulder of the patient against a round object made of linen or wool, and make it as large as necessary. and hold and gently apply the force, and pull the bead towards your hand, so that you can place the incision at the same point as before.
And if you do not treat the head of the force with care, because it comes in front, and the patient may fall on his face or head, and place the shoulder outside the eye socket, and support the shoulder with your hand until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
And then close the incision at your own side, and if you break the limb, then it is necessary to amputate.
And then cut through the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, if it is one of the incisions you have; but if you use too much force on this instrument, to avoid damaging the face:
and seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as the bone desires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will:
and have two heads, if you see, and the larger ones are for wider pieces, and the smaller ones are for narrower pieces, according to the swelling of the wound you made when you treated the bones:
When you are sure of the incision, if the wound is small, and if the burn is not large, or if you doubt the incision, if the wound is made of linen and bandages, according to its quantity.
And if blood comes out of the wound, then pour oil on it, rosewater, and wine, and apply it.
The softening of the bone is when it has pains and is feeling small, you should then put on the bone a poultice made of flour and urine powder, and light sponges, and a spike of wool at the end, if you have the skill. Then take a very large bandage of a palm leaf, then put on a double fold of sponges, and apply it. Then take a thin needle of III dozen wide and long, and wrap it around the bend, so that the end of the bend is secure. and put the needle on the bridge, turn the bend around the neck, and take out the healthy shoe, and take out the sick shoe. and reset each part, and when you see that the bone holds the bridge firmly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the broken bone, then reward each one accordingly, and when the joint is loose, then the constraint.
and make the patient lie down on his back, and when he falls asleep, put a small pillow under his head, to lift the helper to the top. If the fracture is aligned by aligning the shoulder or tying the arm to the collarbone, and it does not dislocate due to accidents, it should be able to hold for about 20 years.
Then continue the splinting, if you see that it has its use, and tighten and release it as needed until it is restored.
And it will be restored in about 28 years, with no harm to anyone.
Of the break of the shoulder
Only the shoulder bone breaks or becomes loose in the body and does not move on its own, and it does not occur unless touched.
If the limb appears distorted, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
Then put powdered sulfur with much urine on the limb, and lightly sprinkle it, and make a double loop. Then put a wide and thin plate, a bit larger than the shoulder blade, on the limb, and if it is not well adjusted, use a woolen bandage for adjustment.
And then tie it tightly with a long iron band, so that the plate does not move from its place, and watch the line every hour.
And every time it is dislocated, if it is pulled, and sets the joint at its place, and the patient feels pain on their chest;
And the spine is restored in XX days or XXV.
And when these numbers are completed, if it does not return, and be sure, because this is only what makes the joint feel lighter.
And if a piece of bone is found before the other, and there is no sound when it is struck, then it is said that the bone has been fractured, and we make the repair as we have described in the reduction of the force of the abscess.
of the break of the bone
The bone is never broken in its environment, but this happens rarely. but it often breaks at the joint.
And when it is broken in the environment, if it is out of place, and there is great pain, and loss of strength, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and opening the wounds in the broken bones, and they feel better.
And the restoration is when the patient feels pain on their chest, and the spine is set between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the two costels at your hands, and subtly put them all in the way that you can, as long as the bone feels like it should;
Then apply splints and bandages over the subtle surface of salt or another light substance, and wrap it around the broken bone, so that it does not move. And turn the tie around the back, and hold it tightly, and reward each hour with a drink, and if it loosens, then tighten it.
And if it comes loose due to corrosion or pruritus of the limb, or pain or gangrene, and loosens, and loosens the bandage, and adjust the splint, and address what came from the ways of treatments.
Then reset the guide, and hold it as long as it is stable.
Of the fracture of the ribs
Fractures of the ribs only occur after the back is broken, and at the top of the chest, and they do not break for any other reason, as they are fatty. And it feels well in the examination as it should.
And the restoration is if you put the fracture in place as it should be. Then place the plaster and draw it tightly with a steel bandage, if you have the skill for it.
And if the rib fracture is inclined towards the chest, it feels very painful and pointed, like labor pains, because the bone does not cover the skin. And it has points, and all other symptoms are vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have put great emphasis on it.
If it is said that it should be administered meat that inflames the belly, by fastening the girdle around the loins.
We do not do this, as it is not necessary to have apostemes if it has not come. And if it has come, then it is the right one.
And say no one puts forceps on the leg, for they form like reason. However, it is not certain that the forceps do not cause doubt when the leg has too much tissue due to its position.
And none of them say that they should cover the throat with oiled wool and put tents between the ribs to measure the length of the rib cage, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure due to the bone not piercing the tissue, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to cut off the shoulder of the coste brisie and put an instrument to hold the face.
And therefore, one must break the bone, draw it lightly, and then cut the lips of the wound if they are large, and treat them with plasters as soon as possible.
If the abscess pops, then put on the cloth that is greasy with oil of rose, and put it on the leg.
And treat the leg while it is dislocating, and put on the cloth that is greasy with oil of rose, as long as it is healthy.
And also to the spine of the back.
When nothing comes to help, and you see if it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Dangerous are those who die in many ways, and if they are silent and feel well when extracted and not stretched, dangerous ones that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put them under care.
And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of the bones that are soft, and the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is a jump and vomiting with will;
When it is removed from its place under the belly, it seems to come out willingly. And when he feels pain on his back and sees it swelling, if he can. Severe cases that are fatal: If they do not labor much in their care.
And if this accident does not come, it is the lighter thing.
And the treatment is to reward it if it has an abscess, by putting on oil rose or oil of mustard seed until it is calmed.
Then put on a comforting plaster and let it dry, and tie it with a cord, and command the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where the pain is felt, as long as it is healthy.
If any bones break, then cover them with a cloth. And if the bone is large, assemble the two sides of the wound with a stitch as much as possible, then apply a poultice made of uncooked wool, until it is healthy.
If the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone", take your left hand packet and place it in the other hand on the part where it hurts, then put the splint and the bandage over it, if you can.
Then hold it steady, and if it has broken bones, then cut them off, and the bone, and dress the wound as much as possible when it is healthy.
Of the fracture of the hip bone
A sudden injury occurs when the shinbone is broken, and if it does, it is not usually a serious matter at the ankle. The broken bone becomes long and twisted, causing pain in the jaw, teeth, and surrounding tissues, and the broken piece is felt.
If you extend your hand over the broken bone as far as the fracture site, the repair can be made. Inspect the break and its position to determine the best course of treatment.
If the break is only at the ankle, place the fracture in proper alignment and hold it there until it heals naturally.
And if the fracture is long or it declines into the dens, then I command the patient to lie on his stomach as much as possible, until the restoration of this fracture is clear. And when you have placed it evenly, then place the template on it, then place a piece of flax or thread, and tighten the knot, if it does not move.
and use the shoulder blade as much as the line is even. And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if abscesses appear, and they come, if they do not hurt, then as long as the abscess does not hurt, and put what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and tighten as much as it is possible, if there are no other accidents.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The helper is that which is between the rib and the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then it should be restored according to one of the following ways:
One way is to use a piece of flat stone, according to this form:
And place the heads of the bones in this way, and hold them up, and put the patient on his side.
Then the patient's broken arm is placed on the flat stone, until it reaches the shoulder, and has a small hole in the stone, then it can be used for no heavy thing or to extend the hand.
Then put the forceps evenly in your hands, as long as the forceps return to its original position.
And the other way, if one cuts the patient's hair too short, and grasps their hand at the wrist, then commands the ministers to touch the parts that are bare on the patient's hands, and then touch the rest of the limb without touching anything else, and extend each part to its place.
And if you see that the extraction is too painful, then force the limb away from the bracelet, and remove the bracelet, and extend each of the ministers to its place.
And if the forceps is near the shoulder blade, then you should put one ligament on the other side of the shoulder, and the other on the other side.
And if the forceps is towards the elbow, then you should lightly put the ligaments on either side of the shoulder, as long as the forceps is even with the shoulder and the elbow.
Then place the forceps evenly, as long as it is possible, and hold it steady, so that it does not move.
When the abscess pus comes out, if it is not strained for seven days, and it is rubbed with fine oil and rosewater until the abscess pus is eased.
Then strain it, and the way to strain it if you place the plaster on the wound, then gather the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
And tie the bandage, and strain it with the helper and on the arm, if the arm is in the elbow, nothing will stop you, or if the shoulder is not moved.
If you doubt that the bone does not move, use these, and place the cutting on a larger and stronger bone than the others, and have between each cut one space of two spaces, and make each space as large as it passes the break three times of each part.
Then draw the saws, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, making them stronger and less slanted.
If you see the seat of the saws and the stretching, as we have said, in the bone that you are resetting the broken member, and you doubt the grip, if it leaves it to tighten in the ninth day, as we have said.
Then look at each of the three years, whether the link is itchy or does not come to the skin, or the incisions do not come to the limb because it is too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if there are no such accidents, then it should be done, unless after three years or more, the patient falls asleep and has his hands on his stomach.
And then place the assistant in a plain linen bandage, and look at each hour of the day or night, whether the broken limb does not move, or is not smoothed by the ligatures.
If the address is by the virtue of medicine, and it is the meat that we have before us, in part as to make the meat subtle at first. And when it comes time to take it back, if it is large.
And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be taken back in XL jors of everything. And therefore, it must be deshed and administered with baths and remedies for the wound to be healed.
And if the stricture is thick and blocked, it should be desisted for 4 to 6 weeks.
of the shoulder fracture
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "femur" and "tibia", and one of them is smaller, and it is this one that forms the pouch.
and the other is large, and it is the one that is distorted, towards the small doe.
by chance, only the large fleshy part, or the small one, and by chance, together with the eyes.
When the small fleshy parts are broken, the restoration is lighter, and the cures.
and when the large ones are broken, if it is a poor cure, and more painful than when they are broken together.
If only the small splints are broken, it is best to extend them lightly and make them even.
And if it is the large fleshy part, then it must be stretched more forcefully.
and extend it over the thumb, and stretch the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones must be lower than the others, and the patient should be crooked over it, and the thumb in front of it, so that the patient does not suffer any labor.
Then extend the muscles of the arm to the part opposite the hand, or to the elbow, and some other muscles to the other end.
And then he places the head in its place, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, he places each in its place, and if there are no loose pieces that point to the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set the bone and the head.
And if with the force of the wound, I have spoken to the single surgeon; if it is treated.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur that are difficult to remove, if the dressing made of olive oil and wax is not too soft or too hard, it should be. and gently lift the dressing as long as the abscesses are soothed.
And then the bone, and he puts the plaster with a lot of powder from the mill with urine, because it puts the stitches, and it is the plaster of the fracture that is further apart, and a little wider than the others.
and you should say that it must have six stitches or bands in more positions: that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two:
and is pulled more under the fracture than elsewhere, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter: and be the bandages that are under the wet and moist fracture, and not be too hard or rough:
and be the bandages that are under the wet and moist fracture, and not be too hard or rough: And let it be the son, who is far away, from the lion, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
And reward the member and the limb after some years. And if any harm comes to the member, if it is like pruritus to the member, then you must wash the member with hot water as long as the pruritus is calmed.
and let the member rest without being too tight.
And then the inflammation resumes, and if the limb is smoothed and the bones are revealed, and it seems like something, if it is removed.
And if the swelling is not coming to the member because it is too swollen, because there are no poultices that can relieve it, and let it rest for some time until the swelling decreases and then extract it.
If these things do not come to the patient, if he does not loosen the dressing for 20 years.
Or if it is necessary to examine the chest, then one can put their hands on the chest, and the chest should be even, and it should be quiet and calm, and it should sleep on its back.
And you advise that this cauterization is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the wrist fracture
Wishes that on the back of the hand and in the two wrists there are few fractures, and only painful swelling many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or crushed, if it comes that the patient lies down correctly, and lies straight in front of him evenly.
Then the patient places their hand on the extended plank, and extends the muscles of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the joints, as long as they are well connected.
And then the patient applies plaster and bandages, and if it does not come, then they put a stopper according to the size of the limb. and is wrapped in one layer of linen.
And if the fracture is at the side of the hand, I make a ring of bandages, and instruct the patient to tighten it on their broken hand. Then the strain of a long, loose hair, and it is the same as the pain of being touched to the palm as large as the plant of the hand, and it is held steady, if it can be done.
If the fracture is at the neck, then if you place a splint on it and another one in the plant, if the hand is over and straight, then the bone totally enters the hand, and it is held between the two.
And if the cutting comes to none of us of the two, if it is closed, then it is closed, if it can be done. and it is held with the palm, and if you see if a straight small finger is raised to lift the cutting, and does not move.
And if the cutting is in other two fingers, if it is closed in the index or one of the others, if it is closed, and it is held with the healthy thumb that is after. If you tie them all in one knot, as much as it is worth, or if you put them on a stool, as we have experienced.
and take care in the restoration and positioning of the abscess, and cut away what comes, as I have said.
The head of the shoulder is often broken many times, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward.
and the restoration if it is tied with the ligaments of the fracture, and the other is loose. And the patient is guided by his face, then extends each of the muscles of his limb equally.
When the fracture is out of the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the limb, then some of the bones are turned away from the point of impact, and the others are broken at the fracture.
And if it is near the knee, then loosen the kneelinks and extend the leg.
Then place the bone in its natural position and adjust it with your hands until it fits, then insert the splint and wrap it around, and do not move unless it does not fit.
And if it has swelled, then leave it to rest and return to your work and treatment. The bandage is made in parts.
It is necessary that you wrap it around the fracture, doubling it in two or three, and removing any excess, then bend the leg until the heel touches the root of the nail, and tie one end of the cord between the knees and the leg, loosening the knee joint, and let the other end of the cord go to the ankle;
Then turn the leg and the thigh of the knee, then put the splint on, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
Then use the seventh between the leg and the thigh of the drapery to evenly stretch the strapping, then begin to tie the third or fourth formation above the splint. And as more is added to the splint, the less it is tightened.
Then take the two filaments that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above them, then return to the opposite end of the knot at the chief of the filament, as long as you see the knot loose.
When the limb is forced to move, if it does not move from its joint, then it is left alone, and it does not come out of its abscess or swell in any other way. And if it happens, if it is not treated, and addresses the matter as we have said many times.
And if it has pieces of bone that prick, then it can be treated; it may not be possible. And if it cannot be done, then the limb must be cut and drained. And the treatment should be done as we have said, regardless of how healthy it is.
And no time is the joint broken when I place these, as in the helper arm and shoulder.
In the restoration made thus far, it does not creak the patient's joints.
And you should know that the cheekbone is restored in L years, or less than that, or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
It is said that in the right knee joint there is little breaking, but it often swells.
And if it breaks, if it is not much more than a fracture, or a puncture, and comes to all the wounds, and feels pain, and that feels okay.
And the restoration is that it is placed even those that are loosened at both ends, as long as they can be assembled.
Then the template is placed, and a ring is inserted if you have the skill, and it is tightened as it should be, then reward all the adjustments we have made in other dislocations, such as clicking and other appearances. If there is an accident that it can happen, as long as it is healthy.
Of the break of the leg
If the leg has two bones, then some are called "true" and others are called "false.
And it comes all the same as a broken arm, and for this is the restoration like that of the arm properly, and all the parts are. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the small bones are broken, then turn forward.
And if the large bones are broken, and it feels great pain, and it is seen that it is very bad. and turn quickly.
Then, apply extension, and place it evenly, and bend the elbow evenly.
However, if the fracture is ugly, and there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter. and lift it according to your strength.
And when you have completed your task, if you take two strips of fine hair that curl on one side and the other, and are long enough to reach from the thigh to the knee.
Then wrap the other around the thigh and knee, and tie it tightly, and at this time do not allow the leg to lean to the right or left, and it is well.
And no one has ever maintained a long leg without pain, and it has been found to be true, and they put it on the leg to warn of movement, and it is truly made in the fracture or wound.
And shakes every leg to see if it has an abscess or no other accident. If the treatment is as long as it is healthy.
Of the break of the bones so large
At the ankle there is no breaking of bones, but the large bones break never, and you must be careful not to break them in more positions.
And if there comes as much pain in the fracture as it is, and you see these bones over each other, then put them so that the top one is on the ground, just as it was when it was flying, and then now put your foot on the knee that was injured, and lift the bones as much as they seem to be in their places;
Then place the cauterization instrument and extinguish it, and make a small incision in the lower part of the belly, then draw out the pus through the hole, then wrap the wound with lint and other things that you have skill in.
When three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, you will find the bones unevenly broken, dislocated.
And if there are any of the two fractures, if they are restored, then as we have said, use your hand. Then place on the other fracture a splint according to its length, and make a larger incision, then draw out that same hole you mentioned, and draw out the pus through the hole.
And if there are more than two fractures, or more, if you make a splint for each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of lint and draw out the hole through the hole. And let it be situated under the head of the tableau, if the belly is not too full, in order to draw it well.
And you must not ignore other things that I have said at other times, as soon as we have said them. and cut out every accident as it comes.
of the fracture of the bone of the point
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if it is set in place, then it leans towards the side of the full belly, and it should be held by the ribs.
Then fill the bone with the natural material of the patient's cloth, and put it in as thick as I do.
Then the woman is turned, and her back is gently bent a little at a time, and then she jumps on the cotton, as soon as it comes into contact with nature, and returns the bone with the stone.
And when she sees blood, if the cotton is wet, and when she has bled, it is reset, and in seven days or less, it is healed. If the fracture is restored, and if you see, take a bowl of bloodroot, and tie it around the wound, and pour all the blood into nature. Then blow into the cinnamon while the bowl is being emptied. The nature so returns to the fracture;
Then it is filled with cotton, and it leaves no scars, as long as it is healthy.
And when the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the woman, if it is repaired as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
and these fractures are not hidden from those who study and use it, and they read my book.
For the fracture indicates in more positions the right way of the restoration: read the following.
In the garden, when it is broken, take an goose's grip and bite the garden; 1. Then wrap the wound with drapes, and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
Of a fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, as the bone of the shoulder or elbow or appearance, that he be healthy now, if the wounds that we have said testify to it.
And if the healthy wound is, if the vitrol is not coming out, then continue to restore the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if you are not able to come.
And if you are not able to come the next day, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as you are calm and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause bad luck.
If the bone is broken, it is separated at the point discovered, and if you want to put it back in place gently with your hands, at a small extension.
2. And if the extension does not fit to put on your hands, and you have this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the size is according to the quantity of the wound. 3. And for this reason it is necessary to pull three or four times, according to how much he has experience in each treatment of fracture.
4. And it should be tight and large, so it does not slip under the compression of your limb in your patient's chest, and on the other hand, it should be large in front, and wide in front, like this:
And is called "palinché", because it is necessary that the head of the bone be placed on the shoulder of the shaft. And the bow should once again be placed, as it rises, and should be equal on both sides. And if the fracture is not obvious, and the strings cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the top of the bone with the string as much as it has power.
And if you do not bring the bone back as we have said, if it does not hold with an appropriate instrument, whether it is a chisel, an incisor, or a more suitable one, to your hand;
then use the one that you have found to be appropriate in the hard and small holes in the bone.
When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it indicates that there is something wrong with its natural state.
If you keep it in its place until it is in the shoulder, then wrap it with black vinaigre, and properly so it is; and do not put anything on the wound or other parts unless it is oily, so as not to cause inflammation and decay.
then administer ointments as you restore the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it completely, according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound is not strained with the fracture.
and many times have I seen this cause the man to die, and have made the patient come out of the poultice or mortify or corrode never. and let the scabs be softer and more moist than those of other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you doubt that you have had an accident, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if you cannot find anyone to help; but wrap it with cloth, in the limb of the wound, harden the ends, and tie them.
When you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, and if all that you have placed on it is beneficial for healing wounds, and if the ointment is effective and similar to what you have used.
It is necessary that you stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is painful and healthy.
It is necessary that the limbs are straightened in a way that the bow can be easily moved.
If they persist, and the bow cannot be held back, but moves forward, it is necessary that you try to hold the wound with a tent, and all these pieces that cause the pain should be realigned.
If an abscess comes to the limb, or in any other way of corruption, if you must cure it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken, and open the limb, as we have experienced with the bone of the arm or the helper's leg, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if you do not treat it, because many times there is death, but leave it until it bleeds;
by chance, the bone may heal after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can.
If you do not, then leave it alone.
We often come after the health of the fracture, but when it is near the joint, and it is a shame to see how the member looks; and by chance cannot make the member its natural position.
But if it is near us, then we must help it. If the patient is given medicinal steam baths, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, and other similar things, if you do not take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with stebold wine or with a large amount of beer or with honey; and place it on the wound, and stretch it well, and do not let it slip from your hands.
and place it on the wound, and stretch it well, and do not let it slip from your hands. and then let it go, and repeat another one, until the nodes are straight.
or you stretch a well-made piece of plaster; because the property of the plaster is that it holds all the flesh together;
and if the node is already converted into hardness as well as a piercing, and it is painful to the healer, then the coping is done, and the excess is removed. or you dress it with no rasping, as long as it is straight, and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
A weak limb that is after the cast
When the bone fracture is healed, and the weak and subtle parts are recovered, if there come from the cause: if the other is because it was too tightly bound, and it was not well tied as it should have been; or if it has too many ties, and the nails cannot come to the member; or for multiplicity of bending; or if it has too large movements, and it is not in its place at the hour; or if it lacks blood in its heart, if it is weak;
And the treatment if you make the patient lie down, and make the heart tense, as long as it does not multiply in him; And he is given water, and then he feels better and recovers.
Then salt is applied to the member, if it draws out the great inflammation, and often the sweat turns green, as long as the inflammation reaches the member. And it returns to its natural form.
A dislocated limb after the healing process. When the members are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the member is deformed, it does not follow its natural course:
If one does not believe the fools who say that one must break the member entirely at once, and many have done so in our land:
The first sentence to translate is: "et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en venti grans malz, et par aventure li mors;
1. All voyages, if the nodes and tortures are fresh, if they can be raised with hot water, or if the mollifying herbs are cooked, like onions, and roots, and honey, and similar things;
2. and I apply a mollifying ointment, if well made, and take the mucilage of vismalk, and marinate with fat of linseed or oil of silk, and apply on it;
3. or you take fat figs, and roast with colonic fiber, and similar medicinal things that dry the sweat;
There is no instance of the nodation being tightened continuously and long with wet hands. And let there be movement in the limb every hour.
When the tortuosity is awakened and made rigid, like a piercing, and it requires the aid of iron, if it comes close to the bone, under the subtle and light incision. and put on bandages and study the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sense to the target.
For if we are late, if it swells, and by chance if we put it back on the shoulder.
for it does not matter how we move it to the ear if it is swollen. many times come to remove sand and other pains.
always, when this happens, if I make the patient better, then leave it, as long as the abscess is closed and relieved.
Then, heat the stiff and oily member, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the patient's own does.
I have ordered the surgeons for the dislocations of the shoulder bones.
There comes when the mandibles are dislocated, and there are two ways to reset them: Either they are a small piece of bone from their joints, and are softened a bit; Or they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and cut the saliva from the mouth that they cannot hold, nor close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with the word;
When the dislocation is small, it returns through the more various positions.
And if it is completely achieved and accomplished, then you must gently reset it, and do not pull hard.
and in such a way that the physician marks the child's head of the patient, and cuts off the nails of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which is of the second part. and the other hand should be cut off to make them equal.
and instruct the patient to file his teeth and mandibles, and move them all parts. And the surgeon makes them equal, as they should be in their place.
And if the head is gritty, then it is the same as the mandibles themselves, which are hot and oily, until they are reset lightly.
Do not try to fix the head, as we have said.
When they are returned correctly, and the patient's mouth feels well consolidated, if it is wrapped with soft cloths made of oil of rosemary and wax, then the leg is lightly tied with strings.
And the patient sleeps on their back, and if their head is between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves to move, but prays lightly with lean meat, as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jawbones.
And then swallows what he sees lightly, and does not exert himself to open the mouth with his teeth and with drinking, as long as the jawbone is well cared for and healthy.
1. And if the two jaws cannot be set in place at once, and are not converted to their proper form, then if fevers and chills come on, and by chance the abdomen becomes distended, and by chance vomiting of clear bile occurs.
When you see this, you will know it is a disaster. And many times it has killed those who came, in nine years.
4. The force cannot be dislocated due to the cost of continuing the work and the pain, and it is always dislocated once in the defense, and it is felt by everyone.
And the restoration is that the patient stands up and holds his side with his hands. and then presses the shoulder with his hand and it returns.
then places the splint and the bandage, and tightens it.
and the head that is towards the cost is not able to be set. if not, and if it does not dislocate at all, then reset the shoulder on his arm, as we have said.
Then place the splint and bandage, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest as soon as they are able.
And then bring back the head of the shoulder when it is free from its socket.
Of the shoulder dislocation
It is said that the shoulder is dislocated if it is not in its place according to three methods:
that one is that it is dislocated at the part of the socket towards the side. and the second is at the other end. and by chance it is dislocated at the other end, and this happens rarely.
and do not dislocate the shoulder for the spine, and do not dislocate the tendons for the nerves.
and more often dislocates towards the ankle, even for those with little strength, because in this jump it is most important.
for those with enough strength, the jump is not far, and returns to its place.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or injured, and the spine of an abscess is broken, and take care that it is not dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must check it, as long as you are certain. and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocations occur when the shoulder is pulled towards the ankle, and there is a difference between the painful spine and the healthy one, and you will find a clear manifestation of this difference. You will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and remove the covering from the top of the shoulder, just as it is with some bones. and the patient cannot bring their hand to their side, and make no movements.
And if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, because you can see it from the covering.
And this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset, when it is new, or if the patient is weak.
And the way is to gently lift the hand of the weak shoulder up, then remove the covering from the top, and gently release the joint at the top of the shoulder. and he gently places his hand on it, extends it upwards, and then places it down. if help arrives.
And if it does not come as we have said in our hands after, if the patient must be bathed in hot water. and he applies a soothing and softening ointment, if a decoction of honey and fenugreek and honey in hot water is applied.
Then he wraps the patient's back with a bandage, and then puts on the other leg a stool of linen equal, not too soft or too hard, and then places the patient's foot on the stool, and gently presses the shoulder of the upper arm, and pulls the hand of the wounded one.
and some other signs indicate that the patient's shoulder is dislocated, if it does not move easily. That shoulder is back now, and if you see if the reset is done in this way:
and it is necessary to immediately present the patient to a surgeon who is larger than the patient. and it is necessary to turn the patient to the opposite side, and pull the shoulder away from the body of the patient, and gently lift it up, so that the patient's shoulder hangs down. and some other signs indicate that the patient's hand is dislocated towards the abdomen. If the patient is too light, if there is nothing heavy for them to bear with it, then the dislocation returns now.
1. And the resetting is also done in another way:
2. and it is made by cutting a piece of cloth long enough to wrap around the wound, and the ends are tied together, not too tightly nor too loosely. 3. Then it is placed on the patient's shoulder, but if it has been too long since it was cut, and the thread is frayed, then the sling must be replaced with a new one.
4. Then it is extended over another hand, and the joint returns to its proper place.
5. If it does not return to its proper place after all these things that we have said, then this treatment is not effective. 1. Take the first two fingers of the left hand and three of the right, which should be able to enter through the eye socket at a point frontally on the axis, according to this form:
2. Then tie the head of the knot with the other two fingers, so that it does not tear the patient's skin, and then place it below the patient's knee:
3. Extend the arm above the elbow, tie the knot with the other hand, and stretch the other arm to the elbow, then pull the hand down and leave the chest hanging from the other side: The joint now reveals itself.
And when it is in place, as it should be, if you happen to put the glove on the other side, then put a thread of wool even, then sprinkle powdered cinnamon with incense and almond oil all over the shoulder and the back, then pull the glove off the shoulder, turn the linen on the thread, and bind the hand on its own, and let the hands remain still.
And it is necessary that he apply a poultice as soon as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
and then apply more after 4 or 7 days, and move it. And if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
And if the joint is tight due to moisture that came, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three intervals, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauterizations.
And if you do all this, and after 7 weeks, the joint still does not hold, and the arm cannot be raised with the elbow forward, then it is suspected that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened. And you suspect that the joint will never return to its place in the shoulder.
The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by force, and stretching of hands, and it is treated at another time.
and treat as soon as it is healthy.
And after the cure comes pain in the limb, and then movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as the pain is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
of the costly dislocation
The joints that are often dislocated are loosened at points, and the points return.
And it has become loose in all parts, and even before and after, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it can be seen and felt. And it becomes loosened according to each shape. And when you join the male member with the female, if it appears open. For the union is weak, and cannot grip the arm, nor touch the shoulder with anything.
And it is necessary to reset it as soon as possible, because if it is not reset as soon as possible, it would be difficult to return.
and by chance it cannot be returned to its entirety, nevertheless when it is at the root. if it is better than the others, and it causes more pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration if it is, when it is like this, you can bring it back with your hand to your two hands. and the arms be expanded, and the hands are pulled according to the cost of the wound, from outside inward, and bind the jointure to the buttocks together, or to the root of the palm, as it revolves back to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
If he does not see it return to its place, then apply strong extension.
And if two assistants extend the arm, and hold it there, so that it does not move under extension.
Then turn the arm in each direction, then wrap a long and wide strip of cloth around it.
And when you feel the joint of the shoulder joint, if no oil has softened it, then bend the joint as much as possible, so that it does not hurt.
And when it is in the shoulder, if you put a dry cloth with beef grease on it against the back of the neck, and bend it as much as possible, so that it does not hurt the arm at the collar bone, and leave some fingers free, then let go.
If the joint is tight in its place, if it loosens, and leaves it.
If you see that the joint is not tight, if you repeat the treatment and the joint, and leave it for a while until it is firmly fixed. Then release it.
If the patient feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes still, if it is bathed and rubbed gently, and pressed until it is calmed. Or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool, then leave it for an hour and a night, then the bone, and let it enter into bath. And when it is cold, the joint becomes stiff, then the nail is removed, and then it is soaked in water. And I do this two or three times until it is healthy.
And if you see, if it is wet, and the heat is applied with a cloth, and it is strained.
If it returns to its original position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand becomes loose, and the return is lighter than the other joints. In short, it is recommended to return the joint to its place as soon as possible, as long as it is loose, or if it swells or has an abscess.
And if you place the affected hand on a table and extend the fingers, and measure it with your other hand, then place your palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it as it straightens.
Indeed, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place. Then place the affected hand on a table with your other hand, extending and measuring the fingers. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient should place their hand on top of their arm on the table, and look to see how the joint appears.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, if the strain does not ease the apostemas, and it leaves it in such a state that one must begin again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put the dislocated joint back in place after some time, then the joint will become more torn.
And do not think that as long as the hand is swollen, nothing can be held or fastened. Therefore, check if the nerve is cut or the artery.
If there is no other way to fasten it than by fire cauterization, and unfortunately there is nothing else.
And when the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the incision we have mentioned, then they are stretched and left for a while, then they are released and left alone.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, if the heat of hot wine is applied, and the area is rubbed until it is dry.
of the dislocation of both hands
No time has the hand bone been dislocated at any part, no time at the back of the palm or abdomen.
Therefore, the first sentence is translated as: "Therefore, it is the head, and hold the dislocation in your hands as it re-enters, then support the neck of the dislocated part, and it will go to the place where it was disjoined.
And leave it for two days, and then put it in its place.
And if we have said so, and the limb does not move in a year, and the bone is moved, then it is relaid.
And do this often, as long as it is wide, and do the same, if it dislocates in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, as long as it is healthy.
And so on, when it is dislocated from another side.
Dislocation of the shoulder joint of the back
When the shoulder joint of the back is dislocated or becomes dislocated, if there are not enough treatments, it can cause the patient's death.
And the sign is that it jumps and feels like it wants to hold it, but it cannot, and many times the members are softened, either the knees or the left arm or the right.
And many times it is still quiet when it is cut into 14 parts.
That which is still quiet in the buttocks is called "glibosity".
The treatment is that if you reward him when the glibosity has come from childhood, if there has been no care or sanitation at all.
And that which comes from cutting or percussion or similar things, they call the old ways of healing by great words, or it has no advantage at all in great profits.
But I have abbreviated according to my intention, and formed strummens in various ways.
I say that in the gallbladder disease that comes before, no one has ever been healthy or sound.
and also those that come directly in the second chest, and cannot be cured except for the one who comes to the back, as I say.
and it is that the patient's shoulder is extended above his head evenly, and has no strain on him, so he does not freeze.
Then, the surgeon examines the head on the earth, and another part is cut off, and a line is drawn around the patient's shoulders, and another part is trimmed, and the hair is combed, and the nails.
and two ministers cut the lines, one at the head and one at the other parts, among the thighs.
and they should be well closed, the surgeon as we have said, and the patient puts his hands on the spikes, as he recovers.
And if she does not recover through this treatment, then take a third arm of the patient, cut off the nail, and the surgeon should be in front, and bend the head of the spike off the nail, then place the mallet on the spike. And place the mirrors on the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it fits on the leg.
And if you see, if you do this to the handle that turns on the hand. And if you fix the threads of the shoulder of a large hand, and pass them through the eyes, and leave a space between each thread, long and narrow, like a palm.
And have in each thread one hole, or the handle turns, and let the threads be firmly fixed on the ground, if they do not move.
And between each thread have one thread turning, so that the threads turn, and have in two turns two small threads of a palm length, to turn the handle.
And then tie the link that is among the staples of the harness to the head, and the other link to the other turret, and each of the ministers turns their turret on all the link, and the masters place the spikes even as we have said.
And when it is even, if you put on a desiccating powder with much urine, and then wash it off, and then apply a tablet of III doses, which gives the leg of the gilbosite and the healthy part of the spindle its color, then tie the link as we have said, and use the masters' subtle norrising powder until it is safe.
and if nothing comes at the end of health, if it is necessary to administer softening and desensitizing medications with the steel that we have mentioned before. and never administer a splint, and never come across the appearance at the back of the spine of a dull bone, and make sure that this is a dislocation. and it is the bone that is open, because one must not have too much confidence in it. by chance, death might come.
Advise that the joints of the shoulder and the shoulder joint do not come to be dislocations only, but they do not come as often as other joints.
1. And the joint of the elbow is dislocated according to four parts: 2. and it is either bent or straightened, and in front and behind.
3. And more the joint is bent, and less it is dislocated in front and behind.
4. And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when the diseased leg is joined with the sound one, it is longer, and more open, and the diseased knee joint is wider than the sound one, and it cannot double its size in fire. 5. And it is the joint that is shortened due to abscess, because the head of the thigh comes out.
And the sign of him who comes to the healer, if this accident is against these fronts.
And the signs of him who comes at the front, if they are well his leg according to the completion. If the leg is not doubled, and if you see it moving, and if you see it before, and holds his urine, and wets his belly, and when he goes, if it passes under the foot.
And the sign of him who came to the rear is that he cannot expand his gentle, and does not double, and this leg is more tortured than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is lowered against the costals.
If the signs of this dislocation are like, if you reward if it is dislocated, and it comes again according to its position, if there is no care; and it is not necessary that he has presumption.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry that you return the joint, and it is slackened and deformed, and the leg is turned to the left and right. If by chance it returns, and there is no other remedy.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong support, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or with the limb that is nearest to your groin. and other supports extend your hand in this way that it binds your hands with its own belt, then you draw it across the groin. and other ties tighten the belt.
and extend them one after the other until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and holds them down.
This manner of extension is common in IV cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
If the dislocation is at the shoulder, then it is necessary to tighten the bandage on the healthy side of the chest, then tie the ribbon at the root of the neck, and the limb that has been loosened, then tie the ribbon downwards towards the neck, and towards the force;
then tie a few more bandages on his arms, and wrap the largest bone of the malformed limb, and extend it to the deformed form: if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
If you do not hold the joint in the manner we have described, then it may come to pass that you hear the two feet of the maimed person assembled as a strong tie on the two ankles, and on the two thighs, and so the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the others.
Then it may be hanged suspended from the head of a post, and it may be suspended from the earth with the two arms extended.
Then instruct the minister to bind the head of the cuckoo, and have other ministers hanged with the maimed person, who bind the cuckoo, because the joint now returns to its place.
When the dislocation occurs at the ankle, if the patient feels pain, as we have said in the one who has gout, and draws the legs of the affected leg properly, and also the foot;
Then put two bandages, one on the head and one on the foot, then fold the bandage between the legs of the affected leg according to its shape; When the patient feels pain in the area where the bones are moist, and it does not freeze the shoulder, then each servant extends their hand towards him, and he holds the dislocation steady in his own hand.
If it returns, it's bad.
If not, place the compress as we have said in the gildershit, and apply it as we have described for the good of the malady.
And when the dislocation is before, if it can be extended the frozen leg in front, according to what I said. And he puts the pain on the frozen shoulder, then presses with the other hand, and extends it towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, and it cannot be extended the frozen leg forward, and does not lift from the ground, then it must be as if it was dislocated in the shoulder when we say so with the two shoulders. and is placed on his face, and the link is extended as we have said before, and must be pressed against the joint at the table. and will be at point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal. therefore tie the knots, and put the bandage, and tighten it with a needle, so that the wound does not move. and rest for three or four hours, then remove it, and put the bandage on.
and if you see that they are equal, if tightened, as we have said before, and leave them for three hours.
Then the cast, and I made another element, as long as the limb is comfortable.
Of the first dislocation of the shoulder
The girdle is loosened in three ways: it is to know, of denser and deeper, and further;
and not loosened in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if the knee does not hold, it is loosened.
And the restoration is that you make the patient sit right, and extend the leg if possible, and put your back on his head, and put his foot on your thighs.
Then take hold of your gut with your hands, and draw it between your two hands, then fold the two sides of the gut that form. And then extend your hand further, until the gut returns to its place in the shoulder, and the signs are that it has lightly grazed your thigh.
And then apply the plaster, and make the thigh aerate at the knee, and the fingers assemble firmly for three or four times, then take it off.
And do not work too hard on the skin, until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not present, if extended firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the bowstring, as long as it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the big toe.
The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is bent and twisted.
And the signs are if the ankle is swollen, and try before the part where it is dislocated.
When the dislocation is light, it should be gently extended with the hands only when it is weak.
And when it is completely dislocated, if you must sit the patient straight, and hold them with one hand on the thigh, grasp the ankle with the other.
Then pull the leg away from you with your right hand, then with your left, then stretch it out, and hold it firmly at the top.
And do this twice, as we have said, by bending and pulling the leg.
If it returns, that's good.
If this does not occur, if the evacuation recurs, because it returns.
And if it cannot return, then pull on the shoulder with your hand, and make sure the opening is firmly in the ground between the fingers, and twist it gently so that it does not cut the shoulder.
Then smooth the fingers, and some other fingers extend the wrist to the hands or to the elbow, so that it is above the shoulder. Then extend each finger evenly, and the thumb should be between the shoulder blades to hold the shoulder steady while extending the fingers.
Then place the other hand on the dislocation and have others mark the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it hurts sharply, if you apply plaster and cover it with cloth, and bind it tightly, and pull the strings that are at the ankle, so that the laces do not draw too tightly.
Then leave it alone for two to three days, and if the laces are loose, then loosen them.
Then come back after a week or two, and have the patient use the splint for four days. If it goes before the end, it is only a matter of time that it dislocates again.
And if an abscess forms, it comes; then it is necessary to open it, if as we have said, it is healthy.
Of two, one When both are dislocated, if they can be extended well in the work, it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation occurs without any force on the shoulder, then it is necessary to place the patient's hand on the bone or on the table, perpendicularly, and put your finger on the opening of these joints, then press with your finger as it re-emerges.
And when it is equalized, and there are no openings, if you place the heel of your hand on the patient's shoulder, then the joints will form, and you should leave them for a few hours, then remove the bandage. And I make him rest, as long as he is healthy.
Of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen being restored, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are merciful and compassionate and slow, do not be hasty.
And at the beginning of things, use calming remedies for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope, if you now reset the limb to the joint, but the abscess is still active and draining.
When the limb is at the joint, if you administer soothing things to stop the swelling and treat the wound, as necessary, with desiccants.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture, and the bones are damaged, then the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And keep from entering into despair, according to what I have said, for this is good according to your creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and heart.
