You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and made the end through its exposures and by its declarations. And I came to my mind that I have fulfilled this with the cautery, which is from hands' work, it is known as "surgery".
And because the work of hands is troubled in our region and is neglected in every way, if it is perished by science and knowledge, and there is nothing left but the small descriptions in books written by the ancients that the hands have seen. And this has led to the error and ignorance, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
I seem to think that I could revive this assembly of the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation. and I will come together the forms of the fire-cauterizing instruments and other tools of the work with the assistance of the declaration and preparation of the patient, as it is their craft.
And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And he who enters the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and teeth, and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of the limbs, and the fruit of their issue.
And because Ypocrates says that the non-drugs are not enough, and with the work they are few. and in the art of hand.
We say in the introduction of this book that those who are not acquainted with things before said, if they attempt it, they may err and harm men.
I have wanted many times to write about these who become involved in this science and if they abandon this science and sense experiment.
I see a man who cuts off the penis of a woman, and cuts the veins of her leg. and so much blood comes out that the woman dies in her hands.
And I see another man who operates on a hernia of an old man, and the hernia was large. if he takes with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died in three days.
I have already been called upon to treat this wound, and I see the position of the helper and the size of the wound, and if it was not cut well, it would die.
And I see another man who treated the duke of our land who had a broken leg and with the fracture caused pain.
And the patient's ignorance tightens the wound on the wound as it is seen in short time, and does not leave the wound any pain, and leaves it at the end of the term.
and he orders that it should not slip away.
and waited until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot, and it came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and cut off the leg. and when I cut it away, if it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
But all the ways of corruption were already confirmed or member, and could not be healed.
And the corruption spreads throughout the member as long as the limb is completely destroyed.
And see another mirror that will fall and be enchanted, and then inflamed by the malice of his lordship.
For chancre, when it is free of melancholic humor, only then does it happen that if it is not in part the limb can be completely healed what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: It is to know, how or it has risk in other arrangements.
And I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and fear.
Therefore, it is important that you keep yourself informed, so that the foolish do not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in hand, and lightly but firmly use your hands, and use the best way if for the grace of God you come to salvation and be wise.
and let the distressing diseases of grief be cured.
and doubt your weapons of this that you do fear, and be sure in yourself so that you can come from this world to another for glory.
Galen's words are not understood in any of his instructions. Do not trust in the care of a sick person, lest you be called a foolish man.
I have found this treatment in three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and it is the ordered chapter for the head until the feet.
and of the forms of stitches, and of the sutures of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and sawing, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
and it orders the chapters and the forms of the stitches.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and it orders the use of different tools and the forms of stitches.
However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and no harm to any complexity.
I say that the quality of aid, and indeed, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret remedy.
and they spoke of more things than the arrows, and they agreed to this.
The patient's hair is instructed to be let grow long and even for the fire cautery treatment. If pricked at the base, the eyes must be held steady to prevent movement until growth occurs.
I say that fire cautery helps in curing all complexions, regardless of their nature or type. It is known that fire cautery can cure hot complexions with moisture and dry complexions with dryness.
In hot and dry complexions, there is no other remedy or treatment than fire cautery, as it is the greatest help. And they say the opposite: That fire cautery is only effective for diseases caused by heat and dryness. For the nature of hot fire is that it is very hot, and it should not be cured by hot disease through chilling or by any other means.
And that which says the opposite that cauterization gives great aid to hot disease and dryness that comes in the course of men. For when you perceive the heart of the patient and its moisture on the complexion, you know the heart is burning.
And I concur with this statement. For I have never found it before by experiment.
And all ways, no one should interfere with this more than he who has experienced it and knows by long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the spasms of tens.
of other complexions we have no knowledge, just as in cold and moist diseases. And they were found to resemble and agree with the cauterization.
Understand, children, that cauterization is similar to fire if it is a secret of the arts, and above all, it is an ardent medicine.
For the fire is simple, and it only causes harm to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members.
The heating medicines come from one part of the body to another by moving, and they bring about the relief of symptoms of sorrow to health. by chance, the patient meets.
The doctor has high hopes and the goodness of his substance does not do much, if it is not deficient.
And I found this by experiment and by the length of service and study I have given to the art, and it has proven true.
And I apologize for the length of the speech, because it pleases me only to show you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says when demonstrating. 1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
1. Understand, son, that the cauters should be made in such a way that they are appropriate, and they should be pried.
I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the pain is relieved by the aid of cauterization. And I say that cauterization is used for necessary pain and hastens that cannot wait for the time when the greatest harm comes to the member.
And do not think otherwise, foolish man, if they do it as the physician does. For in the disease that is cured by cauterization, there is no return. And he says therefore:
And he says therefore: but it is not so if they are careful, because cauterization is only a means of burning that dries the complexion, and drying the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines for hastening one's valor, and for the virtue of one's work and signory.
And there is something that the disease grows once according to the complexity of the patient's condition and the strength of the disease and its virtue.
and the excess is assembled in him by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not cauterized, then administered to the patient or he has little excess and moisture, like cauterization of teeth for pain, and similar things, and part of the pain does not return; but this is rare.
But few people understand that cauterization is called the end of medicine, and it's true;
The patient only believes that cauterization is useless after medicine, but they understand it is false, and it is a cauterization of medicine because when we administer remedies for any disease and they do not work, we then use cauterization, and it works.
2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is called surgery, but not according to the attention of fools.
The ancients said that cauterization with instruments of gold is as harmful as with iron, and they did not know that it was because of the quality of the gold and the high nature of its substance.
They said that cauterization does not make any wound worse, but it is true to see that I have experienced it and found that it is seen in some men.
Et cauteres d'or valent mieux que de fer, si com ils le disent. And all voy you see the instrument of gold is heated, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down.
And if you heat it too much. If they make in the fire. And then it is enough prevention.
Or you have ordered this chapter of the little finger nails, because it is easier to find.
Olive oil cautery is used on moist and cold hands, and it is done for the disease called "soda," and for many humors that descend from the little finger as ears, and eyes, and numerous sleeplessness and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of disease.
The form of this cauterization if it is that the patient has been purged by solvent medicine changing the head, III nuis or IIII, according to which virtue and strength and accustomed habit of the patient he can bear. And then repeat the chief of the male patient.
And then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and put your hands on their shoulders.
After, place the root of your palm tree between the roots of his two legs. And if your two hands come together, bleed slightly, and clean the fire cautery called "olivare", which is shaped like this: And place it on the joint of the elbow, and pull and stretch your hand little by little, and twist. Then gently release your hand, and reward the elbow if you see the first bone a little small. If you do not see it, if the cauterization resumes as soon as you see the bone, like I have shown you.
After taking a piece of silk and rolling it, and tying it around the wrist with soft cotton thread, and putting it on, and leaving it for three days.
After making the silk thread even and smooth. And leave it until the burn is cool. After treating the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacone", as long as it is healthy.
And tell him, the older the wound, the more it will bleed. For this reason, seek help immediately.
And no one of these says that you should stretch the cauterization so much that part of the bone is raw, and then remove what is raw of the bone, and treat it.
And one should continue to shave as much as possible, and press firmly until the bone is thin as the women do in their ears for the reason that the humors come out outside.
And one should continue to shave the overturned wound. Afterwards, one must cure and soothe it.
These two methods of cauterization seem to be the best in general, because in no man is there fear or doubt.
And it seems to me that I should leave it alone.
For the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to continuous solutions of nature, as we have experienced in other parts.
And similarly, when the head of the shoulder is weak due to nature, and the first appearance of the cautery is more salving and drying for me, and I use it accordingly, I assemble the salutation.
Throughout the entire head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, if it must use the drugs called "cochies" and pills, and purging of the head and oils and plasters. And if we make the cautery as we have mentioned before, it is not worth it. The head of the patient's shoulder is severely dislocated, and it cannot be moved. Therefore, the fire cautery should be applied to this area that we have previously mentioned. After performing the fire cautery on each of the patient's corneas, as we have previously described, and then performing the fire cautery on the area called "vaselines,"… and it is these that are then covered with a ventouche. and clean your hand if you do not see the bone. The patient feels much greater pain in this fire cautery than in others, and I will speak to you about it further.
et covrent que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c'est li forme:
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and When one part of the body suddenly hurts, and it spreads throughout the illness, and the head is purged with altered medicines, and the other cures mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, but none of them help. And I made the cauterization in two ways, that is, with medicinal ignition and with iron.
If the cauterization is with medicinal ignition and you burn a dose of alum, it will scorch and rupture the skin, and then they make the temple where the pain holds in a certain way so that you can replenish the dose of alum on the wound.
When it is corrected and held firmly, and left alone for twelve hours. And then the splint is removed and the wound is treated with honey, leaving it open for two to three days. Then, if necessary, put the leg in warm water until the swelling goes down.
After the wound has healed and is healthy.
If you see that this cure does not work or if you have any questions about the remedies I have written or other treatments for burns, please consult a qualified medical professional.
The iron burn is according to this method. Heat the iron burner so that it has this form:
And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or has one hole for the ear, and appears to be small in size.
and place the painful shoulder on your hand, hold your hand steady and gently pinch the skin a little, until the half of the distance is covered.
and hold your hand gently so that the artery does not burn, which is cold, and there is a abundance of blood.
After putting cotton on the thread, and place the shoulder for three days. Then I put moistened cotton on the wound and then treat the shoulder with ointment until it is healthy.
and if you return to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing tool called "cultellare" at any point, and do not cut the artery in this wound that is not yet closed.
of embolism
When you cure migraines, as we have said in dividing diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before says of medicine and hot iron does not help, therefore it comes that you walk the cauterization which is called "cultellare" as soon as it is white.
and still wait until the shoulder does not have a line of half a dozen long, and hold your hand once, and the pressure that you do not compress the artery and do not come to the bone.
and cut off the lower jaw that moves when it is cut, and the nerves only have motionlessness and spasmus does not come to the patient, and cut off the artery when it is compressed, or compressed has great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced. and let the evacuation flow in its course.
However, I will explain blood when the artery is closed, and I will show you where to find this in the book.
And if you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the head as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery with the cauterization that has two loops. And this cauterization is better than the one we have said and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from too cold
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and it is heard of medicines in solution and other remedies that we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, therefore wash this cauterization which is called "points", of which the form is:
After that, cut all around the unhappy ear, or around the two lobes if they cause pain at the base, and then pull out a little piece of the root of the ear since you have found the earlobe's end. and cut on each side of each ear by X points.
after you have healed the ear as much as it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
Torment that must be treated by cauterization is only those that move due to sweat, as we have said in the division of diseases.
and do not make cauterization as those that come from scratching and sweating of nerves.
When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent with fumes of ydrs and spurging of chief and gargle, and it does not work, then you must first cauterize the patient with three cauterizations. One at the root of the ear, and one on the forehead, and the third in the jaw of the two lips.
And place the cauterization in the part that is open healthy, and make the cauterization at the top of the ear where the tip of the ear is without the corneal part of the ear, and another in the temple as long as some punches. And leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt too much.
And this is the form of cauterization:
And it is the appearance of cauterization that we have shown before, but it is a little more delicate and it should be a little larger;
After curing the shoulder as I have said before, until it is healthy;
When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I did four cauterizations: I sewed the two corners of the head, and I removed the head, and I also cut off the part called "gaskins" as we have shown before, and I cauterized it on the mouth of the stomach;
And treat as we have said before.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
For this disease, the physician must give the patient large doses and modify the brain with pills.
After the physician has treated the patient's head, he puts on the occiput the plaster of snip, which is written or treated with ointments.
And this is the way to cauterize: If you do it as I have said.
If it is healthy enough, it is good. And if it is not healthy enough, make three cauterizations on the head, descending from the forehead to the neck, and leave a space between each of the two large ones.
And the treatment is like the others, and if you see assistance, and the patient is suffering, then make a fire cautery in the environment. And if the craftsmanship is, it is with the other two corners, and the treatment as long as it is healthy.
And the cautery that is called "olive" is like I said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned with years and what we have said before.
After the surgeon has cleaned the head, then make a fire cautery on the head and at each corner, and the buttocks and III at the spine of the collarbone.
If you have more skill in this area, and the heart is wet and the patient is sweating, and the disease is advanced, then make four burns with the spike on the back; and leave it as long as the more painful it is, and gently hold your hand; after the cure as long as it is healthy, and the burn that we called "olive" is located in front;
The first line of the text is "de l'epilempsie".
Epileptic patients should only use cauterization when they are flemmatric, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
And if it is children who cannot bear it, then make a gargle and mastication, often with raw meat to modify the brain;
after you have removed the head from the environment, and I make a burn according to what we said before, and the burn on the face, and on each corner; When the patient suffers and is in distress, if they are paralyzed and have loss of sensation in the body, apply the cauterization as I have said to the one who has spinal and collarbone injuries, with the olive-shaped tool according to the method I have described.
If the patient is awake, perform the fire cautery in this manner:
When caused by melancholy, the superfluities or corrupted and slippery moisture becomes large, therefore, as we have said for those with paralysis, perform the fire cautery on parts such as we have described.
And if caused by melancholy, the descending superfluity is melancholy itself, and the slippery moisture of the body, then it must drink something according to what the brain is capable of, as we have said in the division.
After the chief of the patient is loosened; after making a linen bandage well-made, as I have circled it, if I put it on the head of the patient;
and the patient believes it is well-held, and it should be held tightly by all parts;
after applying the ointment, and it is good to use old honey; And when the heat of fire is applied, if one can bear it, then they should do it. After emptying the circle with a needle, and leaving the head cool.
And make this once a week for each patient with another government boiling, as it is healthy.
If you see that the cauterization is burned, by making more pricks all over the cauterization.
This method of cauterizing moistens the skull greatly.
And then put soft cloth on a plier and grease with linen grease.
of the hair of the eyebrows. When hair comes first as signs that I have said in the division, then it begins and therefore drink and do this thing cleansing the head, and the warde of all moisture, and I make it soak more times in the morning.
After the patient has shaved his head, and the hair is cut, and the cauterization is made on the two temples, and the two ends are assembled, or if one end is shorter than the other.
and cover all veins and arteries that are exposed and are long according to the size of the temple;
and guard against dislocation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, if it is due to a part of your body being weak, like you have;
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery as you have done;
and never do you cauterize or harm the two hips bones;
And it is seen that these are cold, wet superfluities, therefore I made the fire cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the descent of the hairs: I cauterize the head, and you cauterize on the two temples, and you cauterize where the hair grows; And if it is more bearded, then the cauterization is sharper than the tip of the thorn in every small cautery;
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore it is better to drink a mixture of three maladies; After he arrives at the physician, and I perform a cauterization or a thousand olive cauterizations. and perform two cauterizations called "clavilis" above the two knees, a little off from the thighs.
and cover the artery that you do not close.
And this is the form of cauterization called "clavilis":
When the ointment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore it is cauterized with this cauterization called "olive oil": 1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it
And if you see if I perform two cauterizations above the knees as the thighs are, and the calves are.
and do not leave me your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
For the hair that does not have oil. Never has it happened that the hair of the olive oil is converted into wax, and pricks the oil, and then I make a cauterization according to two ways: This is about fire, or ardent medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are grown and even, then set the patient free. Afterward, sew the paper of the hairs, such that it is as thin as the skin, and that it covers the beginnings of the signs of the hairs.
Then apply fine cotton wool dampened with olive oil and musk, then scrape the fire cautery from the edge, then shape it as follows:
After the fire cautery is applied to the part that has been pricked a few times, the wound should be cleaned.
The signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised at the tip of the oil.
Then gently press with your hand, and leave it for three days, then put soft cotton on the wound as long as the scab forms. After the ointment cure is complete and healthy.
And if after that the hairs come out and the paper is softened, then continue the cauterization on the same part as you have done before.
And if the hair is burned, if the cauterization is done so that the paper is raised to its natural skin, and is even, and does not prick the hair at all.
The hot cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hair grow as long and even as possible, then make a piece of parchment the shape of the mirror's edge.
Then take some French soap and live chalk, of each one a .З., and grind them together well. And grind it thoroughly, if it does not freeze, then scrape off the shape you made with the mirror's edge, and put it on the paper of the hairs. And if the disease remains in one place only, if it must be removed, and it is not possible to remove it. and then place a thin cotton cloth in the abscess's mouth.
And the patient's head is in your hand and you show him the medicine, and press on the pores and the muscles every time the patient feels bitterness from the medicine, because he feels bitterness like from fire.
When you have this done for a long time, if the medicine does not help you. And when the bitterness has passed, if you lift the arm, and see if the paper is raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision. If it is so, then it is well.
If it does not work, then apply more medicine to the joint or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your joints are even and your eyes are steady, then proceed.
Then apply soft cotton wool to the blister as much as the skin allows, after which clean the limb of the ointment called "dyafenis" and other ointments until it is healthy.
If you have the skill to properly care for yourself, then you should take good care of your health with great diligence so that you do not lack in medicine.
And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair touches it in oil, then apply more medicine to the limb that has become soft from the paper properly, as you have done before. after the cure when it is healthy;
and it is the shape of the humerus bone:
And since the size of the bones in men varies, and according to this, you should adjust your measurements:
and do not reply with the wrong direction to the one that is the study of this art.
Of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you treat fistula as we have described in divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not work, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand: and trace the patient's head between your hands in a way that it does not move or change position:
after wipe with soft cloth around the eye or with persillon oil on the oil:
After heating the cauterizing tool that is divided into parts:
and it is bent at the head if it forms like a quill of feather, assemble the cautery so that it is the one bent.
if you see, if it is pointed at the head and if you see, if it is like a tent.
but still, this one that is bent must be straight for your work.
After pressing the fistula it will be stretched, and in the dough, and it is dried. and if it is closed, then the work, and it must be made into a mold.
After the fire cautery is applied, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where the oil is seeping out of the wound, so that your hands do not get burned. and place the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good. If this does not work, then reapply the cautery again, and if you have the chance, leave it for three days.
After that, apply moist cotton wool to the wound, and apply the desiccating ointment as soon as it is clean, and if after forty days it is not clean, then apply an acidic corrosive medicine as soon as the bone is exposed. And the traveler follows according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones knew. Understand the fistula, and feel the leg. After putting the needle in the fistula, the subtle change is that there is a form: and they make a quantity of one .З. of puncture; and hold your hand firmly on the needle, and do not move the patient until the punctures are closed and the wound does not open, that the holes do not touch their oil.
and it is necessary to put on the oil with cotton wool softened in the corner of the eye or in the ear.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the newborn, and bring the fistula back to the center of the umbilicus according to what is appropriate for the specific case.
cracks in the lips Often there are cracks in the lips that are called "splits," and also in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks according to what we have described in divisions, and the patient does not benefit, then use a small cauterization tool according to this form:
And it should be carefully placed in those cracks as much as possible.
after treating the shoulder, so that it is healthy.
When abscess comes from the root of the gout or the vein, or the tooth, or the roots of the teeth, after making a purge and vomiting and it becomes watery and turns into a fistula. And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all. Because it is necessary that you have a cauterization according to the size of the fistula. After the plug or stopper of the fistula, and hold your hand until the fire comes out of the mouth, and when it's done.
And then make once or twice, after the cure we have said in the cures, until it is healthy.
And if it is cured once or twice, it's good. And if not, then you must expose the limb and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in this chapter.
When the knees are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it does not improve, then put the head of the malady in your care. After shaving the cauterization, its form comes after in a similar way that you put a collar around the tooth.
And apply cauterization to the burn, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels the pain coming from the root of the tooth.
After loosening your hand and continue cauterization according to your will.
After filling the patient's mouth with salty water and rinsing it for an hour.
And in a similar manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out and becomes hard.
of the pain of the teeth
When pain in the tooth comes from cold, whether it is cold or not, and the remedies of medicine are insufficient, then it has to be managed in two ways: And cauterize with salt and fire.
If you can only find salt, then cauterize with it, and make the end as sharp as possible, either with a iron or a steel tip. After that, take cotton and wrap it around the sharp end of a needle, and then make a hole in the burbled salt, and insert the tooth of the hammer as firmly as possible, and hold it until it cools down.
And often until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and thread are burning, and put the iron handle on it as soon as the fire reaches the point of the tooth.
The first sentence to translate is: "Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;
After heating the cautery, if it forms like this, and then place it on the tooth and hold your hand until it is cooled down.
Do this often, as the pain will be relieved either immediately or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot butter in the pressure of this cautery, and then it will cool down.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And make the cautery as big or small as you want, according to what you have.
And this is the shape of the gauze:
The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules When the scrofulous boils are full and cold, and do not respond to medication for digestion, therefore, wash the fire cautery with soap after it comes out, and there will be openings for the smoke to exit from the other side.
and put the fire cautery on the wound once, or it will be difficult to remove, until it comes out of the font of the wound.
and if the wound is small, then put the fire cautery according to the size of the wound, and leave it for three days. and put on a soft cloth until the swelling subsides.
After curing the shoulder of wounds and injuries as much as possible.
When the moisture reaches the joints and suddenly when cold becomes, then it is necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines by the physician.
After the cauterization at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but just a little.
After the other cauterization at the junction of the other joint of the spine, and it is the cauterization called "clavicle" as we have the form before.
And treat the limb as we have described when it is healthy.
When all and disease of the joints are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is a chronic disease, then cauterize with the force you wish. and I another cauterize between the two knees.
and the cauterization called "clavicle" according to the form previously described.
And if you see, cauterize by pricking all the cauterization called "points" according to the form previously described in the disease of the ears.
And let the points be such as to cause pain up to thirty, or more.
After treating the wound according to what has been said above, and if it is a burn, then apply the cauterization of III rains according to this form:
And because they are lighter, because you make 3 in one piece.
of the dislocation of the shoulder.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After which the patient is made to lie down on his back and side. After gently touching the area, use your left hand.
And if the joint is dislocated, wash the fire cautery with water, and then this is the form:
And cauterize the knee as far as it pains up to the chest, and then use four caustics together.
And this is done with the fire cautery that has three needles, because the form of cauterization is six caustics.
And they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the third type of cauterization.
And never is adjusted this point because it has eight cauterizations.
After, put the cauterization on the burn with silk. After, make the patient rest, and do not let the limbs be long until they are well comforted.
When the dislocated head is reset, it is difficult to move, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Therefore, a cautery is performed on the large part of the cautery clavicle, or the tip of the cauterization when touched.
Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient's health is improved.
When coldness and moisture come to the stomach and it is pulled out of its complexion, and the purges are multiplied for him, and the customary cures are made, and he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and his legs and hands are extended. From this, I make three cauterizations on the thigh of the patient for the quantity of two doses, at all the cauterization clavicle, and two cauterizations on the costal bones as much as the cauterizations are at three angles, and it should be spaced between them so they are not joined together when they sweat;
And be the cauterization if it is necessary that they prick the two parts of the hair, and let the appearance of the cauterizations follow this form consistently:
And if you see a large cauterization on the stomach following this form;
And the one who has fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and holding on to the stomach and according to the quantity you see, not following the amount you see. Then the cauterization is done on all the points called "points".
After the cure we underwent, as long as it is healthy.
And the liver comes with pain of fretting and moisture and great fatty deposits, as it is made unnatural by its natural complexion due to superfluity. The patient should be treated according to what we have mentioned in sections, and if it does not profit him, then the shoulder may become inflamed due to its own friction. A sign of encephalitis is a burn according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, if it comes from the pituitary gland, or if the fluid of the brain comes.
And there should be space between each cauterization and the growth of a tooth. And let the cauterization be long enough on the course, and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization.
And let the wound be as long as possible on one side, and let the shoulder be on its own bone.
If it cannot be done, then do it hastily, and extend his legs, and loosen his bows.
And if you wish to do this, then cauterize these dou cutellaire cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and take care not to burn all the skin, for you will dry out the entire body. And so that it does not turn black, for the skin is very delicate in places, and you will see.
When he has touched the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or in the cloth. If he is in labor, he feels great pain but not too much.
And if he is in the loom, he feels sudden pain.
And when this cure does not disturb the eyes, it comes to be that the patient is sad.
And then draw up the flesh or abscess, and then heat the cauterization that is similar to a thorn, of which the form is: And cauterize until the knuckle is burned, and it goes away quickly, as long as the friction is all firm.
After the treatment, according to the treatment of fluids as long as it is healthy.
And it is necessary only that this cauterization be used by no one but those who have studied medicine for a long time, and through these hands, these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Can it be done boldly, and I seem that it is not worth leaving.
Dou cauterization of plasters
The ancients said that one should make from aristole roots cauteries, and in the same way: Take an aristole root as long as you can find, the largest one, and make it dry, and make it as big and long as your two fingers: And grind it into oil, and put it on fire, and cauterize the cautery between the force and the col, and two small cauteries in descending in the part which is dried by the beard:
and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the seventh, on descending towards the back; and I cauterize the hip, and I other at the stomach, and I between II shoulders, and II are the deformed cautery that is between the shoulders;
and do not press your hand, but make it open as you smell;
And no ancient says that no man uses fire cauterization like the scarifier, and they squeeze it and put it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the abscess; and flee the pain, if it is like we said in the abscess of the belly;
But in this case, there is no pain or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be saved.
of the mouse.
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not benefit, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you know.
There is a way to do it if you make three or four burns, according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cauterization of the fat that we have mentioned before.
and do not press your hand on all the burn, and let the patient be on his side.
and another way to cauterize if you wash the burn that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and gently touch the bone that is where the hair is, or the painful part of the patient comes from the outside, and the elevations you make to the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
After burning the two nerves until they are felt from the other side, then take the cautery, and then it will be used in four places.
And if you see, if you cauterize all the cautery to three nerves.
After the treatment when it has gotten colic due to long tenacities, and this is what the other treatments before said.
Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, for it is called "ascites".
When you cure according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries on the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the intestines, and one on the back near the spine, and one on the anus. Et let the cauterization be well near the edge of the ear.
After leaving the cauterization open, allow the patient to have a long bath and do not let the doctor see the patient after the cauterization. And the healing will be faster, and the two intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
The form of the cauterization is on the belly, it is the clavicle that we have shown before. And on the back it is olive-colored, according to what is placed in front of it.
When the feet are contracted to the one that is hydropathic, and are plain yellow, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricle and the anus. And gently place your hand with the fire cautery so as not to turn it.
And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the patient's skin will be burned, and the cauterization should be done according to this form:
After making two cauteries on each leg at the sharp tip; and the longer one, cut off the foreskin in front and the other facing backwards on the leg;
and leave the cauteries long enough to cure, as it is in its place;
after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the vitamins and digestive enzymes that are in the stomach and intestines are swollen and cannot be treated by usual methods; You see the patient suffering greatly and of great courage, if I do a proper cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or a cauterization on the stomach, the cauterization circulates. And I do four cauterizations on the belly subtly at all the subtle cauterization clavicles, and I do two cauterizations on the thighs.
And if you see much moisture and the patient is suffering, make the fire cautery on the point, and the cautery on each side, and the cauteries on the stomach below the great belly button, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the embolisms are or fundaments, or one or more, and they are old and are of large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit if I do cauterizations: The third line of the text translates to: "He then inserts the spine of the doe, which is completely free and not very thick, and he uses the fire cautery on the boudoir twice.
The fourth line of the text translates to: "And if you think that his stomach is cool, and the meat is not cooked, and the face begins to swell, then the face that is first cauterized is the stomach, as it is said, and the other is the liver, and the other is the gallbladder on all the cauterization plates. The fifth line of the text translates to: "And he leaves the cauterization over long ten. After the wound has healed to the point of being healthy.
When you encounter a burn, if the cauterization appears to be too harsh, and then apply it evenly on the affected area. and leave your hand there until the cauterization burns at the vein's birth, without cutting.
Do this once or twice, and if it does not help, then cauterize again as we have advised. After the treatment of wounds, as soon as they are healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cauterization iron on the skin, it will give more help.
When the patient cannot bear tightening or opening, which we will tell you in his case, if he comes to a more serious illness that cannot be cured by cauterization.
When there is no fistula, and it is awake and has sweat and putrid milk, if you provide enough of this subtle tent, and make sure to hold the entire tent as much as it has to.
After rinsing the cauterization iron that appears to be too harsh, and cut it through the fistula according to the amount that it tries and enters, and reapply the cauterization as soon as the corners are rough and corrupt, once or twice, depending on the amount of burning.
And the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
If the fistula is located in the course of the vein and the intestine, and if this is done, and it is only done in the flesh, and believe that it is not a serious matter.
After the wound is healed as much as it can be, and if the wound is cleaned, and the materials are long and tough, then you can be sure that the wound is completely healed.
And if the materials are not long and tough, then you can be sure that the wound is deep, and the bone is broken at the root. And as one of these we will say in his shoulder.
When pain in the head comes on, and is accompanied by large ventosity, and there is no woman available, then it is necessary that you cauterize the head with the clavicle on both sides as we have previously mentioned.
And if we cauterize in the environment, then there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is full and weak with pain and moisture, if the midwife retains the urine, then it is necessary to cauterize in the part near the bladder on both sides of the vesica, where the hair grows, and on the left and right, and each cauterization is like one of our fingers.
And I make a fire cautery on the back, either you or I do it for you in a gentle manner.
And let the cautery be done according to the form previously mentioned.
When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed. And when they come, if it causes great pain. Therefore, it is recommended to do the third cautery outside the belly, as we have said, or a cautery of the bladder, and then a fire cautery on the back.
And let the cautery be done according to what we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the cheek of the jaw, and for this reason if it remains motionless in its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found that the bones are in the wrong department, if you must cauterize the patient's shoulder at the corner of the jaw, and you should cauterize around the bone before the corner, so that the corner turns the circle; if the jaw is in the circle.
and if it is cauterized like those we have cauterized, the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-shaped cauterizations on the knee, and it should be cauterized as all the knees.
When the patient is healthy, the treatment continues.
of the pain in the chest When pain comes in the shoulder bone, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and the disease is old: Therefore, it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with fetid pills or other bone-like pills. After I have done the cauterization:
And the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: It is necessary to know that the medicines are burned together and the fire cauterization is performed.
Fire cautery, if it is done incorrectly, has ways such as these:
If you are cauterizing the bend of the horse's hoof, do it in this way: Triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make a good depth and large size, and let there be space between each cauterization like a dot, and it should be olive-colored.
Never has cauterization been done on the sole of the hoof, because there are four according to this form.
And if you see, if it is done at the cauterization circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the hoof.
But make it in a way that the circles contain the entire face, and all the spears are according to how they should be.
This is the manner in which one treats sciatica, when the pain remains in the buttock and does not reach the thigh or leg.
And when it comes to the thigh and leg, if the surgeon says that the pain is from the cauterization, then cauterize at the ankle four times on the side opposite the pubic bone.
And if it is the cauterization of the cuticle, and if the pain is great, then
and if the surgeon feels that the pain extends to two or three points or near the question, then cauterize at the point or three points that are called "points". And if the skill is lacking, I will do more of it.
If the pain is in the groin and moves towards the thigh, perform cauterization using a circular or cutting instrument, and take good care of all your cauterizations so that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen others who have cauterized on the ankle and burned so much that the entire leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and it was noticed and corrupted all the toes. After a solution of the stomach which caused death.
If the pain is in two parts assembled, perform cauterization on both, according to this method.
And the wise said in the cauterization of the thigh, whether it is like this, make it such and let it be as big as some nail's head or a smaller one, and let it be by intersections and let it be between intersections as much as the quantity of a new pouch.
and let the intercostals be overlapped by two parts, and also like noses, and it should have one handle of well-made iron.
and it is the form:
and it should be washed as much as it is all red and wet, and then put on the handle of the malady's shoe, and it should be turned around on the clean chest.
and it is cauterized once the cautery is re-heated and left for three days. and then apply a poultice of burrs, and leave the wound open long tenacious. after the treatment of ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cauterization due to the fear of its effects, and few use it.
and all that is cruel cauterization, which can be endured, and either it hurts or not.
The ardent cauterization is if you have an instrument with sharp points inserted in the corner of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel, with a length of several fingers, and at the top it has II us, and between each point, the quantity of growth of a doe. and be overwhelmed and united, and they join together according to this form:
After placing the handle of the axe in the shoulder of the patient who is gripping it with both hands, and pressing your hand firmly on the handle of the axe. After putting the axe between the two circles of the hot water that is heated in the firepot, and leaving it for an hour without movement, and the patient suffers from fever and arsenic poisoning.
For it gives off a burning sensation as if from fire.
And when the burning sensation has passed, you will feel your hand with the instrument and raise the axe of hot water gently, and leave it for three hours, and put it on as soon as the black part of the bandage is osteotomized. and let it remain for three days before feeding again.
and this would be the aid on the side after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that matches what you have done in the shoulder.
And this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written or treated about the correction of medicine. Prepare acid and live fire, as much of one as of the other, and mix them together, and put them in a new pot. or there is a small hole made by a sharp point that can be entered with a razor.
or there is a small hole made by a sharp point that can be entered with a razor. and put some of this on the other and make it well mixed with alkali and chalk and soft powder until you have enough for your hand.
And he leaves it thus until it descends and becomes weak and chilly or can bleed, then take all of this down and wet it with vinegar and alkaline soaps as before.
And when it will be weak and become moist in the mouth of medicines and in other cauteries of members.
For it makes the work of fire like sticks and if other medicines are used well on the heel, such as anacardium and chalk with vinegar and soap, all these things will melt together.
Galen tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain in the cheek and sciatica, and he says that no other remedy is needed, and that it was effective once for every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed in the same way as he instructed afterward.
And then in this way that you prick the patient with a fresh and dry verdant leaf and let the blood flow with a little grease, and put it on the heel, knee, and leg where the pain is, and hold it.
And it leaves it for three hours, by the amount that the patient no longer feels the pain.
Then, I will make him enter a bath as much as his chest is raised, and then I will let him lie down, and the pain will all leave and he will be healthy.
And advise that no one should use such a hot cauterizing medicine after the evacuation of blood.
And Diacorides says that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the hoof of a goat, it helps to relieve the pain.
and it must be made in the following way. Take the linen and oil it, and put it in the socket that is between the thumb and little finger and the other which is called the fossil.
After drying the goat hoof, and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on wool, and leaving it as long as it remains stained.
and then reapply, and continue to apply as long as you feel by touch that it is going towards the hoof, and that the pain is subsiding.
And these methods of cauterization are called "beaver cauterization".
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by touching or drumming or from too much evacuation, or from the expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, rather it is for the one who has come from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after the patient has been freed from the fetid or other pills, that the doctor places his hand on the patient's back, where the pain holds, and makes three lines with a knife, and in each line, cauterizes or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear.
And it is done with the cauterization according to the point called "points".
And if you see, make three or four cauterizations at the cauterization clavicle according to this form:
This disease often affects many children, and the signs of its beginning are that they constrict their eyes when they are born, and cry. and you thrust your spine into the floor and into its appearance that comes from the other spines.
When you see this and you see it cured, if it is burned at the fire cautery according to this form. If the cautery darkens each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, if it is burned at the spine with the fire cautery pricking two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
After healing the wound as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and if you do not want to perform a burn in silk that is in the spine of the neck.
of the pain of the joints
When pain from joints due to moisture expands to every part of the body and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and remedies of medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in a certain way:
Make the head of the cauterization at the joint of the foot, and the olive-shaped cauterization according to this form:
If it is necessary that you prick the face with a sharp object, then perform the cauterization on the entire cauterization as claimed "point". And if the pains come to the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, I advise you to cauterize each knee with three or four points of the cauterizing iron on all the olive cauterization points.
And if you have more skill, but do not hold your hand for as long as the pain lasts, it will be too late.
If the pain descends to the joints and back, apply the cauterization we have described in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make points every two lines.
And if there is no pain left, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand.
When the pain comes suddenly or in the shoulder, if it is cauterized on each part, and I give good government to the patient and prescribe medicine.
For if you make the midwife give medicine and purge the poison, she will be healthy in the help of God.
When a fracture comes in twists, and the bones hang down like rags, and it is new, if it happens that when you see to cure it, it will not take from him the best of his youth. and that he uses things that make the stomach loose, so that the belly descends from it.
after you have placed him on his back between your hands, and he commands that he shave his hair as much as the bowels are repaired, and you pull out to his legs, and sign that the fracture is set on the bone, and at all signs that it seems like half of a circle to the corners of the two corns;
Then rinse the fire cautery, and it is this form:
As long as it is white and has a taste. Then remove the bung from its base; and it marks your hand as not returning easily;
and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a bandage on him and a sling on his arm, and another on the leg that marks the hands;
then place the cautery sign on all your hand, and hold it firmly and as long as you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, continue another until you touch the bone; and make sure the feces does not come out while you are doing the fire cautery. and do not burn it. and so that the patient does not die, or other harm.
And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
And it should be done subtly according to the size of the child, and also according to the size of adults.
after three days, cure the head of the shoulder as much as possible until the pain subsides.
after the treatment of other ointments as much as possible until it is healthy, and apply the cream for 40 days on the back until the pain is well soothing.
The translation of the line is: "And it is necessary that his wounds be left open for a long time, so that the wounds do not ooze when he rises from bed.
The translation of the line is: "And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, he should tie a well-made bandage around his waist, and every other day.
The translation of the line is: "and he should rest well, so that he works quickly and does not have too much intoxication from drinking and smoking, and does not overbake.
The translation of the line is: "And when he makes this instruction, it is completely healthy.
And I will say this after the trimming in his chapter.
When hernias occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, if you want to cauterize, you should do it according to the quantity of the fire cautery, and so it is for the third part of the hernia. After the treatment according to what we have said;
And no of the old ones have said that one should cauterize with the fire cautery at III angles according to this form:
But the first sign of the bone is the fracture and draw a line for the length of the rupture, and another for the width, and hold the patient's hand tightly at all points of the cauterization claw.
However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and milder.
of pain in no member. When pain comes in any member, whether from cold or wounding, and this pain lasts long, and the cure with medicine is not enough, then it must be cauterized at the cauterization called "points", and the cauterization according to the length of the member, its width, its strength, its virtue, its location of torsions and its pain.
If it is safe with the first fire cautery, it is well;
If this is the name, continue with another fire cautery on it, because the custom is that one must die in the member that it is nearest, but if you want to do the cauteries as long as the patient is safe.
The curses are never helped by burning once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
You can see the cauterization, when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not increase or decrease, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, therefore I do the cauterization on the head: I emmi the head quite deeply, and the other at the end of the wound. and I suspend it at the two corners, and I pull on the hanger.
and I pull so hard on my hand that the cauterization sticks to the bone, and so that the pus comes out quickly, so that the vapors of the large humors can come out.
And the cauterization is done on the mouse according to what is before.
And if the scarring is everywhere sparse. And if the scarring is manifestly present, then you must first cauterize with these cauterizations that we have mentioned or chief, and I cauterize in some places, and II cauterizes at the corner of the elbow, and VI cauterizes at the corner of the back, and I grant at the croupe and I other delez, and II sus the II espaules; And II suspend the knees, and II suspend the tendons of the big toe, and I suspend each joint of the hands and feet, and suspend the holes of the hands.
and you cut off the nerves that are under the heel, which you do not burn.
and never made a cauterization on the bone, and the other on the stomach, and the other on the liver.
And you advise that the more you do cauterization, the more help you get, and it benefits you.
And you advise that the patient does not feel any pain during cauterization if the surgeon feels none, because the corps is already corrupted.
It is necessary that the burn be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
After curing the head with flour several times with honey and other remedies as long as it is healthy.
When the member is inflamed and cured by medicines and ointments and plasters, and it is not healthy, therefore I do cauterization on the member according to its size and thickness.
And let there be a small amount of fire cautery inserted into the skin. Then, the care of wounds as soon as it is safe.
And never make a cautery on the hand, arm, or back, at the end of which the member becomes quiet and if it is infected.
And nothing else happens if it is not known about the limbs and the movements of the muscles in the corpse.
When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the physician's engine does not work, then let there be a small amount of fire cautery inserted into the skin, according to the quantity of the healthy skin, as long as the blenching is quiet and has its color.
Then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and salve of colic and almond, of each a part. And make the whole assembly, and bind with a cloth, and apply as needed to the shoulder until it is healthy.
The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
When the sore first appears, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done at the cauterization point that seems to be a circle, then turn it completely around the entire sore.
And all say that you make cauterization also at the mileau of a glandulent ulcer.
And all say that this is not good, because I doubt that it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted it to happen never.
And the most correct thing is that they be cauterized externally, at the cautery called "circle," as we have said in our mouth of cauterization.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", it delays in dying either due to the excess it causes or because of the greatness of the patient's malady when they are old (that is, too many) and lacks blood, or for tightness. and you see that they are near death. However, the cauterization is done by pricking with small cauters. after it is left alone. For it will lag in measuring.
And if you see it lagging in measuring, if the cauterization is hot and this form is not suitable,
And place your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is perceived by the ear, and it is such that the patient feels pain in a certain way that the course of the sweat is agile.
After the treatment, if it is perfectly healthy.
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a mangy of the limb, because it eats the limbs as much as it does the dry sticks.
If you see this disease in the shoulder that can suffer from fire cauterization, then sharpen the cauters small and large according to what is needed for the shoulder or the disease.
After the cauterization of all parts as much as you remove all corruption, nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted is not ossified.
Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil as much as the burned eschar is large, and all the corruption.
After the care of burns caused by fire.
And if you see after three days that healthy children are not born, it's bad.
and if this does not happen, then resume the cauterization on those who have not yet removed the corrupted hairs.
And this disease has never been cured by medical care in the place of fire cauterization.
but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said that the cure of the disease by dividing: Take what you have skill in.
Of the pores that come as pimples Often it happens that the pimples are caused by inflammation, which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that darkens the skin.
And the treatment of this disease is done in two ways. It is known as fire cauterization, and hot iron cauterization.
If you are shaving, then the fire cautery is like a pen made of iron, and it should be made in such a way that it can penetrate all parts, and have subtle margins.
After you put the cautery on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail. And leave the nail for three days until it starts to exude pus. Then make a poultice of boiled hazel twigs with silk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall off and be separated from their roots.
Then, treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
And if they are converted by defluxion of the core, and many times it happens in hands and feet, then you must have a hot iron cauterization. And it is in such a way: Take an iron nail or a piece of wire, and put it on the nailhead and the neck, which is to remove warts. And if it boils all over, then he puts a hot wax, and holds your hand well, and presses your hand while turning so that the edge of the nail reaches the root of the nail, and you can find the hot wax way properly at the root.
The patient suffers a little from the hot needle for an hour. Then it is left alone, and it will rot completely at all its roots.
I will create another step, as long as you are able to handle all of these, then cure the wounds that have been inflicted with fire.
When any tremble from cold or nerves, or fever, and it happens that you must apply four cauteries or four on the spine, one cauterization between each spine. And if you apply a cautery or poultice, and at the stomach with the olive cautery.
If it allows the trembling to continue, and it will suffer the symptoms of the cold disease.
For no time do blisters or pustules appear on the body, which come from large corrupt materials.
If it is necessary to do the first when they appear that a fire cautery is made on each tip of the pustule: A subtle cautery of marten's wax, or if the tip is burned at the fire, or at the cautery of Aristotle's root, or at the lenticular cautery.
And never is the cauterization done at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it cannot grow hair forward, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy.
But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there are great discrepancies in the blood of the artery that is covered by the wound that comes to the perforators, or the incision of the abscess, or the burn of the member, and similar things. and it is a great sorrowful thing to putrefy.
And whenever there is none, if you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the pain is assuaged by your index finger and no more blood comes out.
Then put the olive-wood cauterys, both small and large, on fire until they are all red.
Then I, according to the size of the wound and the strength of the limb, either cut or make a small incision, and follow the artery with the cautery until it reaches the point where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery as long as it is not exhausted.
If it is hot when you tighten the vein with your child's head, and the cautery ends, then quickly take another cautery that is hot.
And continue to do this until the wound is completely closed.
and make sure you do not burn the flesh that is already dead, and avoid other harm to the patient.
and be careful that when the artery is not cut, it cannot be well healed immediately, unless it is by one of the four methods we have mentioned. Or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by tightening the thread, or by medicines placed on which have caused pain; and it is tied and extracted unexpectedly.
Whoever will carefully manage the remaining of the thread, or to put things burning on, or other similar things, should not profit from it if not.
And if this happens to none and there is no medicine present, then he should put his index on the wound as we have said, and firmly clamp down until it is painful in the wound and in the vein; and he should not move much, but the cold is often too cold that it freezes and becomes swollen and painful;
and make queries before those of which it has skill in cauteries and medicines.
Our advise is that in the first chapter of any disease, if it is necessary to use fire cauterization or ardent medicines, we must know the causes, the effects, the shapes, and the methods of cauterization.
and I have written the first chapter of minor surgeries, and I will enter this chapter by my own way because it is more lightly done than the other.
However, before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
I warn you not to attempt foolishness. For many ways of people come for treatment. If those who were ill with such diseases came with their malady, and died lightly from the severity of their disease, and the greatness of their wickedness; then we should fear.
And of those who say to you this, and say: Wait, I am ready. and the disease is inevitable.
It only requires your consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more than just your honor at stake in your covenant, and do not surrender unwisely but wisely of that which you are certain, and of that which you could have taken and lost.
et use use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients, according to their health.
and may help you achieve this good reputation, glory, and memory of the long-lasting.
Very fine thread, our Lords give you understanding and straightness, and if you wish to hope for the holy inspiration of her hand, amen.
Or I have commanded this chapter in stating that it is a cauterization, according to the cauterizations, which I have commanded for the chief joints, because you will find it more lightly than other things.
It is said that this disease comes from time to time in children at the breast, and when the child is pulled too hard on the head.
and never comes from a cured cause that is not known.
And I have never seen this disease happen except in children, and among those I have seen, it has always led to death. and therefore it seems to me that I should leave this chapter in part cures.
I saw the child crying because the head was painful, and the father tightened it every time he could not endure it.
and thought so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled between the bone and the sinew, from the knee to the bone.
and the wounds are such that the moisture is between the knee and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you should cut out the father a wide gash.
and so long as the swelling corresponds.
and here is the form of the spatulum.
If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, if I make these cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is drying out the bone, and you see the signs of the corners of the chief being overturned on each part, and it suddenly jumps when you press on it with your hand, and this has not been reported to you before: It is necessary that you cut off the chief III ends according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After pulling out the chief III ends, and then soaking them in wine and oil, and leaving them for five days:
Then, dress the wound with compresses and poultices, and let the chief be evenly shaved, and then re-insert it into the dry flesh as much as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incising is to look at or open the size of the abscess, and assemble the angle;
for no time has it ever been before; no time has it ever been behind; no time has it ever been to the left; and no time has it ever been to the right;
Therefore, measure the size of the abscess opening and the assembly of the angle, and make it according to what you have at hand;
and be warned that you do not cover the artery; and come quickly if the patient dies of blood loss due to blood loss and evacuation of fluid;
When there is a disease called "cataract" that appears in the eyes or the nose, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient makes his head. After rubbing the leg with a coarse cloth as much as possible, making the blood vessels visible, then the patient should pull the shoulder muscles tightly with all the cloth. Then look at whether the vein is bleeding, and the blood from both sides are after the ears, and they are quickly stopped.
Then sign the joints as they swell, and apply one and the other with a sharp spatula of II parts, as the size comes close to the bone, and this is by the wide shoulder.
2. And if you see, cut the cloth over the artery and cover with the sponge, by cutting as much as the two doses.
When the vein is pricked, if it bleeds continuously without stopping.
And if the artery does not open with feeling, then it comes that you measure the quantity of the space of III doses, then enlarge and fit to the bone.
and if it comes that sixth doses should be given if there is more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound. If the wound does not come off the bone, and the dressing that was applied does not come off, then tighten the wound and tie it, and the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy.
The first line of the text is "de emigrain When the head aches and is hot, and there are gouts of blood and tears in the temples, and the pain becomes severe, and it is treated with medicines and all sorts of remedies, but they do not help, then we cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
And the manner of removing them if the patient makes the hair on his temples stand on end, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, since it opens well by its beating, and is quickly reponded to than in any other men who are too faint;
and if it is responded to, then draw the collar of the patient's shirt, then rub the neck with a rough cloth, and wipe the neck with hot water until the artery opens clearly. Then take the spatula of this form: then scorch the leather lightly until you see the artery, then pull it up with tweezers, and cut off as many threads as there are from each part.
And if the artery is subtle, then the wound at the tip of the nail will be according to the number of the two heads. If it is not caught, then it will not be held at all.
And take out five pints of blood, about three
And if the artery is large, then cut it in two with a strong silk thread, so that no blood comes before the wound, and it will come out discharging blood.
Then cut the excess that is between the two lines in that hour, and then, if you see, if it burns, then use a cauterizing iron as much as the heads are cut off.
And it is the patient's task to lie still, and if they do not have fever and are of a warm complexion, then it is well. For the cauterization helps to end the moisture. For it is of greater help against moisture.
Or, it is necessary to remove the veins that fill the shoulder with much cotton and place them on well-made tents.
And if you dislodge them, use dry medicines that make the skin red and tents as much as necessary until it is healthy.
And if there is no cort for the artery as much as you can, if you have to cauterize, or use your shoulder of vitrol and hold it in your hand that it does not become stained. If you do not have this presently, then put your hand on the joint as much as possible, and make it cold with ice as much as possible, and hold it steady as necessary.
And it should have between the two cuts a large space, and then when you see the two ends closing, hold the fire hot until it reaches the bone, and cover the vein in the two ends. and they should be moved away from the two heads because it is not a matter of this cauterization in general.
and it is the form of cauterization:
What is more dangerous and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cautery, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer on the pain. For when the wound is too large, it holds less blood.
of tears. When the tears of the hairs are falling down from the veins that are being cut by the hot iron of the fire, and it does not profit at all from medicine as we can see, and the patient's face is twitching, and you see the masseter muscle trembling, and it seems like a seizure; and the hair is thin and moist so that the hair on the paper is cut, and the papers are torn, and burned by the heat of the tears, if it has to do with this treatment; And they called it the "old bruise treatment", and that is what you must do for the patient who has this disease, to cut off the hair that he has or on his face, then I made three incisions or on his face equally according to the length of his face.
And they called it the "old bruise treatment", and that is what you must do for the patient who has this disease, to cut off the hair that he has or on his face, then I made three incisions or on his face equally according to the length of his face. and so one of the incisions is made in the same way as the other on the side of the face by advancing the knife a little, and the others are cuts made with the paper, and take care not to make an incision on the arteries that are made with the paper.
and move your hand away from the continuation of the other jaws, and each wound should have three to the joints.
and make a piece of sponge and wring out some cloths on the sore, then dip the spongue in hot water of two parts of this, and it will form like this:
of the incision that goes into the temple just as the second incision; and scorch all that is between the two fences of the whole face that is on the bone, then make another part of the second incision just like the other second, and then draw out this spongue. If blood flows in the first cauterization using the instrument called "cultellary," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, do not cut it, and this is the form:
And place the cutting edge of the blade towards the horn, and the costeit becomes blunt towards the bone, and the blood stops when it reaches the first cauterization.
And cut off all the veins that descend from the cheek as much as the incision is continued until it opens the eye, and then make another part of the second fence just like the other.
Then the pain is eased perfectly, and the bone is expressed for the blood taken.
Then a thin cloth tent is placed in each wound, and softened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil are placed on top, and they make sure that the incisions do not bleed.
And on the third day, the linen is removed, and a large amount of Aqua Tede is applied, then the wound is treated with Balsam Basilicon with Olive Oil, and other remedies for wounds are applied until it is healthy.
If no blood comes out of the wound, you see the hairs shriveled and bitten, and the eyes swollen, and the papers burned. When the hair grows long and is pricked, and the patient feels great pain, and the physician extracts it. However, these accidents are not common for those materials and their catharsis only comes from many veins, and the physician cures it if it is this.
This translates to: "And is it that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut on his forehead, and another wide one in the cheek? And begins with the cutting of the left temple to the right temple, and it is the incision that reaches the bone. and separates your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at the mingling.
And when the bone is discovered, if all the blood comes out onto an sponge, and then places between the two lips of the cut and puts cotton on top, and wraps it in linen. Then apply a mixture of softened wax and oil, and keep it away from fire.
When the bone is healed, if it comes to pass that you rub the bone as much as possible until it starts to become hard and then the treatment of things that cause inflammation, which irritate the bone.
In this way: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of linen, and make a paste. And apply it to these wounds to relieve inflammation for all.
of the ear's chill
All that affects the ears is one of the four things. Or grains, or beasts, or mines, or similar things if they can be done. If, as before, you sow, then with fire, wheat, or barley. If it flows, as before, like cold and damp, and similar things.
When he pierces the ear drum or any other part of the ear that does not fit well, or grows in the ear, he should put the ear to the sun.
If you see the wound, if no drop of blue or red oil is drawn out, then the extraction is performed. And I apply a plaster made of condensing substance, and it smokes the nostrils when it is applied coming, and I put on the ear pieces of linen or wool. and it stays on the ear.
Many times, it comes out by this treatment.
And if it does not come out, then the extraction is performed with fine tweezers, and the form is:
If she jumps with force, it's bad.
If he does not, then if he insists on the subtle extraction of the stone with little force.
And if she does not jump, then if I make a pinch with a thorn and bite the end of the ring or the ear hole, and extinguish it which is inside the waxed ring so that it cannot enter with the ring. Then the treatment will be formed, because it often comes as we have said.
And if it does not come in the same way, then he takes glue from the animal and takes the eyes, and puts nothing on any instrument that is not for this purpose, and puts a piece of cotton inside. Then press on the gluteus muscle where the incision was made or wherever it is, and pull out the foreign object.
And if it does not come out of any of these things that we have said, and you do not break the ear but only cause pain, spasm, and tightness.
And the manner of cutting if you do it first for the shoulder blade, and remove the bone according to its strength, then hold the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear towards you, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and so it is like a moon, as long as you go to the hole, then the bone according to your pain, and the blood flows heavily in your mouth.
and the cure as soon as it is safe.
And if it is grains that are engorged and oozes, then administer the extraction.
And if it cannot be drawn out, then administer this remedy according to its form: and apply an incision to that grain.
But do not make haste until you think the grain is moist from the earwax, as soon as you have made many pieces.
Then the extraction is done with fine tweezers and sugar, if as we have said, if the extraction is successful.
In the ear, therefore, if the grain is in the ear, then the surgeon should use the first condyles for exsternum, and ample the ear with soft cotton. And let there be scarring on the same ear or the eye. If it jumps for this, it's good.
If not, then many piers are needed according to the length of your member, and they should be light and easy to remove, and they are washed with fire. And he puts the patient's ear on a loop of his own ear, and it comes out from there. Of its other parts, and with great care, from another pierce that is in the ear. And he continues to do this pierce after pier until the wound is completely healed, and then it jumps and becomes completely healed.
When you see that the joint is dislocated, and take hold of one of the bones in the ear, and the other bone is held by fire as much as the more painful joint is,
then continue to repair other joints until they are all aligned, as we have described in the wound.
In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small and like a pin, and is treated as we have described in the division,
but if it is large and can be felt, then it should be treated like a dental extraction. and this is the more gentle procedure when done in the ear.
When extracting the ears of infants, if you clean them as we have said in the division and when treating distillations, but the cure does not benefit, then look at the ear with the sun: If there are no openings, if you use gentle tweezers, and if it does not appear, then take the rope of us, as it is in this form:
And let it be tight and wide. And cut off the more gentle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then completely form the rope; Do this often as you see it.
And if they do not obey, then the cotton thread will be cut off as I have said in the incision.
And if they do not become loose as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients used in the incision of the verses, and you will find or use distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, then the form will be as follows: And let silver or gold threads be inserted into the small holes in the skin, and then distilled.
And to press the distillation onto the well-made silver instrument, and if you see the rashe and wrap around the pointed end of the cotton thread. Then you sweat your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the chain, and the chain is in the ear.
Then put the lotion on all the cloth, and press your hand together until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear. And it feels the ointment of the salves, and the distillations are not hot, but they are distilled in the ear. And keep it from being too cold, as the medicine would not work if it were.
of the ear's chill
No child is born who does not have purulent otitis.
This same thing happens due to fainting from pain, or from the ear being cut off, and these faints do not occur once in the ear, unless one can see.
No one has ever seen a puff of blood, but it is well seen.
That which comes suddenly, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of serious illness in many cases, and then it is necessary to put the painful ear near the sun. and look at: If you see the apparent inflammation, if the wound has completely healed, then this is the form:
And let it be known and understood from all sides before and behind, so that it does not cause the ear to bleed.
If the exfoliation of the ear is due to a thin layer of hair or a part of the ear, and if you use gentle forceps and a light touch, as long as the hair is completely removed.
And if the inflammation is on the edge of the ear, if you have a gentle rasp and a light cope, then you heat it slightly and place it on the ear's side.
If you feel the exfoliation that the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the ear drum.
Then insert a tent according to the large pustule in the ear, and apply Egyptian ointment to it. 1. Do not cause any pain as long as the wound is sore, or take a tent and moisten it with hot water, and sprinkle some pulverized vitrol on it.
2. If you see the ear is wet, then take the tent and put it in a damp tent made of oil and wax, as long as the ear remains moist. 3. Then the treatment will be complete when it is healthy.
2. And if the blood comes out, then dip a sponge and wet it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treated with distillations.
4. That is the one that comes in paper from the hairs when they are wet and dry, if you extend them with needles and tweezers, and cover them with a cotton ball of its roots. Then he puts pressure on the elbow with a hot iron.
And if he does not have it, then the fire cautery of the fine loop is used, and the cautery iron is applied after the incision.
And they are often repaired, with no cure for their roots. And when they are burned by fire, those roots are destroyed and do not return.
of the grit Many times, things come out of the eyes that seem to be wrinkled in their form and hardness, and for this reason it is called "granulation," and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of the eyes and the eyelids. The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent. When the patient is heavy on one side and cannot move, it is a light thing to know.
If the wound is wide, then it is lightly burned in each part, then it is taken with tweezers and the cloth.
If you do not cover it with paper, it will not hurt the patient much;
And if the wound is large, it should be stitched together with a stitch, and it should be cared for until it is healed.
And if it is small, it should not be forced, because the surrounding skin will restore itself too much and become rough.
And if the grain of sand descends into the ear, and it is turned upwards towards the part inside, if reversed, and the grain is held with tweezers, and the cloth presses from both sides.
And if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it causes no harm.
And when the grain is pressed, if the salty ointment is lifted from the wound, and the shoulder is cleaned with this until the patient is healthy.
Of the fat of the hairs Exinach is a grease that is engraved on the papers of the eyes, and this happens more often in children, and causes pain to their eyes, and they come to the catheter in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears flow into their eyes.
For this reason, they lie down with their faces away, they sleep, and their papers are soaked with the ointment that enflames and appears to have covered the wound that was opened in the oil. And when you press your hand on your head and feel the exinach inside.
And the manner of the operation is that the surgeon places his head in your hand.
And then he takes a cloth and makes a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exudate from each part, and then he puts it on. And he presses with his two hands on both sides, so that the exudate is assembled in the circle.
Then, in the environment of moisture, a sharp stone is cut, making a large wound, and it is not larger than the wound made during the cleaning of the vein.
and then the leather is cut so that you can see the excretion. and in various preparations, excrement comes from the wound, in the form of a greasy, pimple-like mass.
Pull the cloth all around your two thighs, and turn your right and left hands as much as it spreads.
and make sure you do not aggravate the wound, that you do not see all over the skin, that you do not bleed.
And if it does not open at the beginning of the foreskin, then slightly lighten the foreskin until it appears.
Then extract it as we have said, then cut it with a sharp and hot knife, and place it on the skin, and draw it out gently.
3. And if such men who have hairy scalps put on oil to corrupt the moisture that is dried.
Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
And if the patient comes to the aid of an abscess, if the doctor uses cleansing ointments as long as he is healthy.
of the papers' hairs When hairs grow on paper that are not of its nature, and are awake, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears and mucus secretions from the skin and cornea, until it is due to the destruction of the hairs.
And the cure is according to four methods: For the fire cauterization, or by medical treatment according to the following, and it is made or by incision and stitching or by ties, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your left hand, then turn the paper around the oil to your right hand.
If it is turned, it is done. If not, then insert an enema through the entire tube. And it should be that the margin of the paper or the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the tube through all the paper, and turn it towards the nail.
Then, in the part of the body that is not covered by clothing, comb out the hair, and apply it evenly to all parts of the body, from the large to the small.
Then, take out the thread and wrap it around the hair, and then place a small tent made of cotton and silk on the paper, as if it were a bow, and if you see that the figure is not according to the quantity you see being raised by the paper that is designed to be so.
And if in some part of the body where you have skill, you find that there is a large quantity of paper according to what the paper is molded.
Then, following all the lines you have written, and start with the largest possible incision just; and make it one of the fissures near the natural hairs in its growth, then cut the tendon at one of the two angles, then scrape it all;
then sew the two lips together with a stitch of a needle at the end of the fine hair, and drain the blood, and dry the excess of the threads on the corners of the eyebrows for everything glands, if you see this done;
and if not, then leave the stitch and the threads just as they are, or three to four;
Then cure the wound with things that are dry and constricting, for the paper relaxes in the moisture of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is threadbare (as they say the old ones); it is difficult to bear. And if another way:
And if another way: And it is that you sign the paper of a figure that is also like the flesh of meat, as we have experienced, at III bones you will follow the form that is here:
Then comes the one who surpasses with equal strength according to the form that is here:
And if you cannot hold the tacks, and the thing is not equal, then take an awl or if it has one, and pull out the figure. and pull out another wire of the great lariat, and the second wire of the small one, and assemble the two threads correctly.
Then gently your hand correctly, and gently all the leather wherever you have signed, as we have experienced, then stitch the two lips of the wound with sewing, and treat it until it is healthy.
When the abscess comes to your incision, if the pain of cutting and wound healing relieves.
And never has it happened that the hair of the paper is converted.
If you must use what we have said about the incision.
However, the stitching in both is more artificial.
The treatment of dogs if it follows this form: And if you were to convert the paper and make it according to what I have said, and then make the dogs by hand, and they are as thin and long as the paper and the widest part of the stomach is. and hold as you hold the heads of the parts where you keep the strings;
then carefully assemble the other end of each string with the paper of the oil, and tighten the threads of the two parts; and leave no slack, and the leather that is stretched will become hard and brittle and crack, as long as it is under pressure;
If it takes time, if the hold is tight, then treat it as soon as it is healthy;
And when the wound is healed and the paper is lifted, and no more hair will grow;
And this is the form of the second cut that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
The tissue is such that you need a fine needle, and one end of a silk thread is fine and smooth; Then assemble the heads and knot them gently, and make the length of the threads equal to a palm of length;
Then order in the race the other fine silk thread gently, and tie the heads of the threads;
Then put the patient's head in your hand;
And if the sun is shining so that the cuts are declawed, because they are small and thin, then take the needle and pass it through all the threads in the race at the end of the hair, and draw it through the paper as much as you pull out the natural hair;
Then, remove the hair until the base, and cut off that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then, remove your hand as the hair grows to cover all the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hair is treated and the hair does not come with it, then you will cut off the hair at the end of all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the hair grows with pain and you see it by the sight of the oil.
Therefore, if you cut off the hair and the thread, and close the oil and leave it for two or three days, as the hair grows in its place and the wound is born;
And if the hair is shortened, then accompany it with long hair of its natural length, and let it be cut when it grows out.
Of the oil's fat Regarding this disease called "aleacrati" or the discharge comes in oil, if it has two ways:
1. Natural way, and 2. Unnatural way.
And comes by wounding, or cutting, or burning, and in similar ways.
And the way of the healing is to cut off that glue, and clean the lips, and put lint on it, and keep it until it is healthy.
And nothing else is needed but to use things that dry and restrict in the treatment of it. If you do this, it may lead to a worse illness than the first.
However, if I do things that are softening, like figs. And if the mouth of the wound is open and the seeds of flax are cooked, and the ointments made from dill are not found in any oil, and a tent is made around it, then the treatment for this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you guard it so that it does not sound like according to its form before.
And the things we have said are not true that there is no remedy for this disease, that it does not recur according to its form before.
This disease that is called "acaratia" truly is called "acaratia", and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounding and cutting and burning and similar things.
If you prick with a needle, and it has two threads, and the thread in the chart, and I make it feel on the opposite side of the arm, so that the threads come to the head of the chart.
Then the chart is at the end of all the needle, and the cap is wide. And if the limb is drawn back according to the rule, it is correct.
If not, then take the ruler and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two or three wounds according to the thickness of the paper.
and be the heads of the two flaps of the two angles of the incision you made, and make some angles so that when they are assembled, it looks like a letter that does not have "I griesche";
then that char, according to the quantity of its cost, which is as much as the paper, then adjust the two loose parts, and the cost of a thread of linen.
then the cure of what we have said about the mollifying medicines and tents, as long as it is healthy.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a flat cut of the hair from the papers according to what is before. Then, between the two shoulders of a tent, as I have said.
Then, between the two shoulders of a tent, as I have said. And it should be done according to the form of the disease, as it is different in form, and the masters' tools are adapted to everything that can come back to its natural shape.
And the patient himself, according to what is needed for cauterization and excision in various positions.
When this suture is made by women in a certain way, that the paper of it is dipped in white oil and cannot move or make its natural cuts, then it comes to pass that you should sharpen the point of a razor and smooth the paper, and lie it on top.
When using forceps, as long as you cover what is inserted in the subcutaneous fat, which should not be too thick nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from too much pain nor excessive bleeding.
And make your incision, where you scrape the one assembled, lightly, so that the paper reshapes according to its natural form.
And the entire assembled piece becomes healthy, and it never has any sharp pain, and it is lifted gently, and warm.
Then place a layer of linen between the paper and oil, and put on top of the oil soft wool in abundance. And afterwards, after the third day, use a warm poultice and things that are moist, as long as it is healthy.
Saws that the nail is cut in two ways: It is nervous and resembles the hard sycamore, and another that is not nervous but resembles a moist, frozen blister, which when touched with iron and cooked with force, if it cannot be opened;
and the one and the other resemble the great alarm, and grow larger and larger as it covers all the vision and all the light and the movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the surgeon places his finger in the patient's throat, then cuts the tongue. And gently place the paper in your hand, then use the small tweezers to pick up the needle, and hold it in place. Then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or goat hair, or beef hair, and a strong thread. And double the point of the needle with your thumb and pull the thread through the finger, and percet the entire needle with the thread and hold it in place with a single thread, and scrape off all the hair from the edge of the finger that touches the silk and the wool at the tip of the finger, then cut away any remaining hair at the root of the nail and subtle skin, and leave the natural or artificial nail, so that by incision there is no flow of tears.
and no time has it been set straight on the finger alone, and as for that, as we have said. Then the scald, we have all the substance soaked, and it is formed like this:
And be careful that the substance does not touch the rough cloth and break it, and the prunelle is not pierced.
and after the incision, a pot of oil is poured into it, and a cloth soaked in litargire is left to dry for the next day. And then the treatment of that which must be done until it is healthy.
And if the finger is not nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the joints cannot enter, this appearance of a finger of medicine is often treated.
and if I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, then do the oil of the female physician, and take the light spumous poultice according to this form: And dip the finger subtly, and if you see that it does not soften and the ration is pressed, then distill from your mouth the oil of colde made of litargire and red colde rose and seil broiet, and it stoopes the oil to the other day.
2. If nothing is against you in the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first cure the abscess as soon as it is healthy, then continue the pricking as before, as long as it is healthy.
Then continues the other evacuation according to this same work, as long as it is all complete.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is pale in the oil at night due to great exhaustion, and one part only is affected, not the whole, then tears do not appear.
Then it is distilled in the cold-pressed red oil that is made from Litargire.
Some people have never seen the color red, and they cut the plums and wrap them in paper and hang them up, and it looks like a rose of balsam.
When the patient is ready, the surgeon places their head in your hand, then operates on the joints, and tightens all loose screws or nails as possible, and holds it in place with your strength.
Then hold the first joint steady while you tighten all the nails or screws as much as possible, and make sure you don't hurt the patient's arm.
And make the incision as small as possible, which we discussed in the incision of the finger, using gentle force, and it will heal well after this treatment.
And when the incision is complete and all the joints are healed, if you use oil of sweet almond or distilled red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put a piece of cotton with an earwax plug on it, make sure it is securely closed to prevent infection.
If it does not cause any harm, and the wound is not infected, and you doubt the aposteme chaut, then leave the oil and cure the aposteme chaut with things that soothe the aposteme chaut.
Then return to your home as soon as it is healthy, and then make several charms with oil in this way.
But it is necessary that you apply the cure of every weak oil of the natural way. and of the accidental way, in the home of iron.
and do not insert your hand into any of these homes as long as you see that your limbs are weak in this home.
Several veins are red that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye's surface and weaken the oil for all time.
The first sentence translates to: "Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and if it is wet, then there is no other disease but the oil. However, the treatment is as follows:
Instruct the patient to cut their hair at the base of the skull, then treat all wounds according to their knowledge, and make sure the scars are not too deep according to this form:
And let it be known that one must cut through the flesh according to this form in degrees of one hand:
Then you can reset the wounds gently, and remove any remaining oil as needed, until all the wounds are free of oil.
And make sure you do not bleed the oil with sponging, and perform this operation before noon in the sun, and be careful in your operation so that you do not cut any further wounds.
When you have this done, if you distill it in the green and red ointment to corrupt what is decomposed and not well,
And if you cannot distill all of it in that hour, then make a plaster with the oil of things that calm the pain of the limbs, and leave some parts until the pain is calmed and assured of not being infected, then continue according to this method as long as it is healthy.
And this is the form of the forces.
The mirror if it calls "arissati" fistula.
When you cure with cauterization and by applying the burning medicine according to what I have previously mentioned, and it is not well, then it must be removed if it is infected, and all the moisture that is in it, as long as the bone is discovered.
When the bone is discovered, you will see corruption and darkness, if all the instruments of this craft are not in its form.
And it is called "sharp head", and it should be made firmly at the head of the tool, and it should be sharp like a knife as it is in its present form.
And place the sharp head of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand as much as you can to make sure that this corruption is cut off.
And do this once, then restore the diseased bone with medicinal excisions.
If you feel pain, and it is swollen, and the belly is also swollen, and it remains for 40 days, and it does not relieve or become less, and no accidents come, be sure that it is healthy.
If this is not the case, and there is no other means than to return the fistula to the fontanelle according to this form: And if you cut through the bone the second time by force, and with medicines, and when it is discovered if it fits according to this form, and the head of the iron should be at an angle of three, and the fistula should be as thin as possible as you see:
Then place the head of the iron on the bone, and spread your hand from the oil I pox, then turn the fistula as much as it pierces the bone and feels to the patient as if he holds his hand on his forehead;
And then restore the dry medicines of the leg, as I have indicated to you, and when the patient feels the matter in the nail. If it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the wounds are fully opened and there is no relief in the bladder or constipation, if you cut off the member, then you must cut off the member.
Then the wound is cleansed, then it is ventoused or pressed with a haterel without causing pain by being sharp, then it is applied with the oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sandalwood, and then it is strained, and it is applied to bandages and cloths.
and the manner of the dressing if you prescribe enough soft threads, and double each of them four times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the threads can hold.
then the thread is stretched by knotting with a hard thread, and the ventouses resume sucking without hurting.
then remove the ventouses and leave the thread stretched for days and nights, and if it becomes entangled, then you can tighten it.
then remove the knot after days and nights, and if you see that the oil is repaired, it is good.
If not; If the cauterization resumes, the bandages and the linen and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
A sudden pulling or tearing of the eyeball When disturbances come in the eyeball cloth, then open, and come forth papers as small as a grain of resin, and it is difficult to see.
Then if you cover your eyes, the treatment is such that you insert an awl at the root of the part that is not so tight, then insert another awl where there is the double thread of the part. and I make it feel, and leave the first awl according to its position.
Then pull down the double knot and pull out a part of the urethra, then tighten it well, then remove the needle and put on a smooth oiled piece in abundance of urine.
and leave it as the urethra is with the bladder, then cure the oil with things that are comfortable until the wound is healed.
and never has the wound been restricted by the bladder of any part of a circular cloth as long as it is healed.
And if the wounds have a great appearance, then if you pierce with a subtle spatula that comes out of the oil, and remove the moisture and descend the wounds, and enter into it.
Then the extraction as long as it is safe.
This disease called "Alcinnatis" is not worse than boils that are assembled in the oil, appearing as if they are descending, but they are not.
And the appearance of the boil if you make sure the patient is lying on their side and straight, then take the head between your hands of II parts, and hold as long as you see the boil coming to the end of your fingers. Then it is incised, and comes down and becomes discomfited, and see the patient's things as they were originally.
If it does not descend quickly, it is acute, and if it descends from the abdomen, it is not as we have said.
If you hold the patient's arm in your hands, then take a soft spatula and continue along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the sclera as long as the abdomen is present.
And when it comes out, if it is distilled in hot watered oil or honeyed gentian, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
of the oils of the oil We have seen the resemblance of waters in division, and what it comes to perceive. If according to nature's health.
It is necessary that you place the shoulder between your trustworthy hands, be by the light of the sun, and let the healthy and tight oil;
Then put the paper of the oil in your right hand, if the hairs are on the right side, or in your left hand if they are on the left side.
Then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the right side, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if they are on the left side.
Then place the point of the instrument on the coronet through the thickest part of the glove at the smallest part of the arm, then pull out the instrument called "almagda" with force, and scratch your hand until it penetrates the glove's thickest part, and feel that almagda is inside the empty thing.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda's hole is at the end of the spacetime that is located in the prunes of the nose. And it is the coronet of the oil.
If you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal skin, and then place the instrument at the place where it hurts, then press firmly on one way after another.
If the patient feels dizzy now, if they see the surgeon before them and the instrument in their hand.
After the child has rested a little and cooled down, the second duct opens, insert the fire with the instrument, and when it is heated and does not rise, gently twist around with your hand a few times.
And then insert a few drops of warm oil into the duct, and remove the excess oil. Then pour the oil into the wounds or soft tissue, and mix it with healthy oil and a little urine, and apply it with the healthy oil.
We, and those who are of our kin, put on shoes with many buttons.
And if the oil cannot enter through the hair because it is too hard, because there are too many men with very hard hair, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
And only pierce the conjunctiva, and do not force it too hard, but make a small incision, then twist gently, as we have said.
And upon completion of the operation, the wound appears to the patient to be healing, and if they lie down on their back in the dark, they fall asleep.
And let there be no movement, and gnaw light meat, and do not move the head to the left or right, and follow its natural position.
Then he removes from this dark house, and examines his eyesight, and I show him things, and then he sets the ligament in its proper position.
And it is only necessary to do this in the eye of the treatment or after the incision now, but it must be done because the inflammation rises quickly.
If aphthae come, then remove the oil from before the ninth day, and apply the remedy that soothes aphthae.
When they are calmed, if you close your eyes and put your hand on any part of your face to cover any part, it does not matter in that dark house.
Then, enter the house cautiously, and convert yourself into its conditions.
and you advise that no disciple should undergo this case. And some came from the region of Yrach, who told us that in some places it was done for the good of all, but we have never seen anyone like this on our land, nor have we ever read about it in ancient books. And by chance, this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of amalgama, because those who do not know them by way.
and be truly of almagama: And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in third angles.
Never are born or do not have different types of worms, because if there are any, they do not seem to be scorpions at the mouth of piers.
and if it has such or if there are worms enhanced in fox color, and if the worms have bone color. In that case of these worms that are bone colored and do not have enhanced color, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands in front of the sun.
In that case of these worms that are bone colored and do not have enhanced color, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands in front of the sun. And she works her nostrils, and pierces the tusk into those charms, and pulls them out. Then try to hold it steady in the subtle crevice of a part, until you feel that the char is entirely free.
And if there is nothing left to try, then examine all the subtle and light parts of the body, so that it does not cause any harm. And without causing you to faint, or if there is a sudden pain, if it follows as it should.
And if it is a malignant faint, then quickly and burn the area until it is not sore and all the charms are free, then gently apply ointment or wine. If the joint does not move, and moisture comes to the palace, it is a sign of health.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, signs of damage may be present in the bone, and if the fractures do not heal properly.
Therefore, it is recommended that you cut the end of the thread with a sharp edge, and it should be about the size of your thumb, and between each bone there should be at least one. And put the sharp end of the thread in the eye, and pull it as far as possible, and move it until the tip reaches the mouth.
And many times they make the child go to school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it.
Then hold the head that comes from the left hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and squeeze them one after the other as we who are full.
Do this as long as you see that the noose has corrupted the thread, then cut off the child's penis, clean the wound, and apply Egyptian ointment to it, and then put the ring back on the thigh as before.
Do this three times or more, until the ointment has dried out all that is left of the thread.
Then place or insert a needle into the skin of any joint as soon as it is healthy, and if it can be used for drying herbs.
and that is the form of the instrument to purge the head, and it is used to distill oils and medicines or other things.
And it should be made of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a needle, and it is led accordingly.
And if you see, if I make a needle closed, and it is the purging oil for the head.
and it is close to the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
and of the sword when the need arises.
Many times it happens in the head of a man who has a disease called "telly" (a term for a type of brain tumor), and grows and becomes large, as soon as it is seen.
And because of this, you must cut it at the beginning, and then put the burning cauterization or the hot medicine on it.
And if you delay cutting it as soon as it becomes large, if it is hard, with a foxed color, and poor sense:
if you do not cut it with iron because it is an enchanted wound, because whenever it is cut, there is great pain to the patient;
And if the patient holds their breath, it is not due to fear of pain, and you see that they can hold it, if the helper is experienced and knows how to do it, and cure the limb of things that are dry and constricting.
It is said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and this is true in no man's land.
Therefore, it is necessary to do this if there is no other remedy, as one can see if the wound is fresh at all times. and then close the lips with a stitch, and treat it as soon as it is safe.
And if the lips are already detached on one side and the other, it is necessary to scrape all the parts of them as they heal, then close the lips with a stitch, and hold it, and sprinkle some dragon's sinew powder, and burn the end. When the poultice is placed on a piece of plaster or another soft plaster that is soaking wet, and it is left until it has dried, then the treatment of ointment is applied as soon as it is dry.
The method of sewing if you assemble the solution: Or by needles, as we have said in the belly sewing. Or by thread, as I have told you.
2. of lip sutures
At the hands of doctors, the corners of the incised abscess are tough, resembling grains of sand, and smaller or larger.
Therefore, you must turn the corners of the incised abscess, and cut them off at each point, and take them with tweezers and glue in each part.
Then use the lever after incising the vitreous humor, as long as it is not stained.
And then use the lever of the ophthalmoscope, and cure the lever with dry things as long as it is healthy.
Many times on the gums are found the old name "albus".
If it is necessary that you hold it with your fingers, and the cap at its root, and let go of the bow or the vein.
Then put on the vitreous humor lever, or other powders restricting and desiccants.
And if it returns after incising, and many times it happens, if the cap second time, and cauterize. If there is no return after the burn.
No times are assembled at the corner of the teeth, the teeth are placed between the lips, gums that are ugly and rough. And no time is the black and yellow tooth, until corruption comes to the lip, and it becomes the tooth.
If you must make the patient sit still between your hands, and the head is in your holy place, and the teeth or gums are exposed, as long as it does not cause any harm. And I make of the black and yellow, and the green and others, as they are seen.
and if it is found in the first reasoning, it is good. if not, then resume to read the second chapter and the tie, as long as you have everything ready.
and you should know that the teeth have the ability to be in various forms of dislocations, according to what is shown by the demonstration, because the razor whose edges are used to cut between the teeth has other forms than those shown in the dissections. and these forms and others are with you apparent.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay as long as possible until you can, because it should not be hurried. For it is a high-sulfur substance, therefore there is no excuse for not doing so.
When the patient is confined to bed, if you are certain that they have pain, then. Many times the pain of the patient has been relieved, and make sure it is not too hot, and make it boil the bone. And nothing will depart from the pain until the bone is boiled, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones.
And when you are sure of the pain, if it comes that you scorch all over the bone, then shave it as much as possible and protect the genitals of all parts.
Then the wound should be sewn to your needs or have small needles inserted at first and then they are firmly fastened. Then the needles should be well anchored. And let the patient's head be held firmly in your holy hands, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After removing the tooth sharply with forceps, and if it does not break, then take none of these hooks and gently pull out from each side, and move it as you have done first.
And if the wound is perceived and cleaned, then it may be necessary to wrap it with cloths, wherever the holes are. And if the extraction is done gently with needles, so that it does not break the extracted part.
And it is necessary to wisely cover over the thigh to remove the tooth's root.
And you should be very careful not to break it, and there will remain a part, and the patient suffers from the malice of the root, greater pains in the first place.
And be careful that you do not harm it in the same way as those who, by their haste and their courage, never break the chariot, and never cause any harm to anyone.
But no one comes to help once by the cough of this great disease, either by the roots that they do not endure, or by the broken part, as we have often wanted.
And when the wound is bleeding, if you clean the flesh with wine or vinegar and sail,
and if they come out of the blood and enter, which often happens, if you use the flesh of green glass,
and if it does not heal, if it is cauterized.
The forms of the stitches, whether they are silent at the first wound, are long and wide and have thick fingers, which do not double when you pull on the tooth;
1. "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And they be of large members if they do not break when pulled out, and they be well-made iron, and they be teeth to hold tightly.
of the root of the teeth When the root of the tooth is exposed to the cheek, if you can manage to put it in the cheek butter of the inner side of the jaw for one or two hours, until it is smooth, then the needles that are called "algefri" will be drawn out, and the head of the shoulder will look well.
and they are made in the same way as a lime and it is in this form.
And if the roots do not wish to come out through all these pricks, then it comes that you dig out the whole of the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a type of tweezer, and its form is like this:
And if it is too thin and large if it does not break easily, and if the root jumps from this, it is good.
If this does not work, if you use all the means, and if the forms come after this:
And if you help with this instrument that has two prongs, its form is like this: And of other forceps that are before in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large thorns, its form is like this:
And let it be known that it is not possible to break it, and scissors are needed with sharp teeth. and also other bones, which are not so strong.
and the masters most skilled use their own instruments, according to what their experience and the disease demonstrate, because they have different teachings on the various instruments, and do not break any chariot or other bones, or cut through them, if they seek the bones that I have said, and I will help you with gestures, as follows:
And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and grasp.
Then restore the patient to the appropriate medicine, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument.
When the tooth appears to not fit according to the natural body, and its form is misshapen, and at the same time in women with pubic hair, if it comes that you must remove the tooth after the dent, and it is not true lest the bone, and one cannot soothe or embrace it:
Therefore, I will reset the dislocation. And if it is with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like this small tooth, and make it of hard steel:
And the force is little by little with the hands years due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be limed, then the liming of a part of the liming as shown here is the form:
and it will be as the gnat's leg that we make:
and with the gnat's leg, very lightly and often in the hands, so it does not move until it chickens:
Then the smoothness at the end for all raspers, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then it is necessary to limn the astringent so that it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth in front of the gum, or by percussion or by cheek, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you cure them with restrictive medicines, and this is not effective.
If the patients are restrained with a gold thread, because the silver threads turn green and slippery, but the gold does not move.
And that the silver threads are neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth erupting, then take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the diseased teeth, as long as you see signs of growth in the healthy tooth on the other side. Then the covering resumes just where you left off, and gently and wisely draw your hand subtly, so that it does not move.
and make sure your line is at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape.
Then secure the heads of the wires with nails, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth and the tooth to be straightened, and make sure it does not damage the tongue.
And then leave it until it is as narrow as possible, and if it does not hold, or the wires break, then tighten another wire.
If it delays and serves as intended, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisor of the two healthy teeth and the two canines, just as you see:
And when the tooth is lost, if it is replaced in its socket, tightly, as we have said:
and does not become loose if it is not sharp and sharp, and never takes the form of a bone tooth of a sheep, and it is placed in its socket or where the defect is, and it is tightened as we have said, and stays there, and serves as intended:
Never has been found a tooth that comes out of the tongue or nature, that has not been made: If by chance there is a deep wound.
And the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth with the scalpel, and the handle remains in your hand, and you hold the tongue.
Then cut the nerve as wide as possible, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it snaps or tears, and that is a sign of pain, then cut the other side equally.
And make sure the blade does not go too deep, for the artery is dry.
And when you are done, if the lip is red and sore, or cold, then place the tongue in a tent of linen.
and the patient's skin is scraped every night, which cannot be soothed.
And if the blood flow comes, then put on the leu with vitrol and broiled wheat. And if it is not burned, then cauterize at the slow cautery, which is good for this. Then the treatment of another cure until it is healthy.
And if you see that the skin has turned red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is gall.
And if it declines to blenchor, and it is moist, if it gushes blood, and the skin is made with a subtle sponge, and the discharge is from both sides; and if you do not want to cause pain in your work, then use vitrol on the wounds as soon as they are cleaned, and return to your work as soon as you have finished everything.
then lift the shoulder joint and the tendon, and treat other wounds as soon as they are healed.
gums of the throat No time comes when the gums called "godath" come out, and they are properly called the second teeth. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, keep a close watch on them.
If it is an abscess of hard consistency and small size, and of a pale color, and not touched with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, and it is not touched with iron at all, then for the dislocation of the shoulder. but it does not leave until it is dead, and therefore it will depart, or it will break on its own.
And if it is of a greenish color and the root is small, and you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first check if the abscess is closed and calmed.
Then make the patient lie down in the sun, and their head should be in your hands, and they open their mouth and swallow the salve between their hands, and press the tongue evenly all over the instrument, and so is the form.
and let it be of silver or of gold as some coins:
Can you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the aposteme, if you take the oncid and the leaf in the amber, and the thread will be further than you think.
and take no thing with the spots, then lay the cape on the instrument, and see the form which seems some force. and the head is all wrinkled, and one place to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument present, if it is sharp, then the form is like this: And be cutting from one part and another part name.
When you have grasped one of the mandrills, if you grasp the other in the same manner, and after making an incision, heat the sharp, hot barbers' knife, and make it sizzle and sputter, and if the blood comes out, or if burns from pomegranate peels are cooked, or if blisters from mirte leaves are caused, and similar things, as long as they are not extinguished. Then the cure is until it is healthy.
And never do any other abscesses appear in the throat than the two mandrills, if they are cut out exactly like the two mandrills.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that it was not dense in the throat, which means it is of little sensation.
and had indeed closed most of the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the clogged pipe, and could not eat or drink, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
And the abscess was so large that it had been opened twice by the two holes.
I then made a deep incision, and opened the abscess, and took out a large portion of the bowel.
and then removed another part from another puncture, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue.
After the onion is cut into these slices, and a piece is taken out, it will only yield a drop of blood. And then the woman's leader was cut off, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting that slice.
And the slice was dislocated further and filled the joint that I had emptied, so it refused to move.
Therefore, I engined and cauterized the joint from the girl's mouth. It did not take long to heal.
And I left these parts, and I was only able to do what God willed after me.
Of the urethra
When the urine reaches the urethra, it is thin and long, and is called "perpendicular".
and if it becomes too large and round, it is called the "urethra".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the inflammation has subsided, and it is softened, then you can touch it;
and the one that is rounded and not long. and if it is bloody or of a purple or black color, then you should evacuate the incision from it. For it poses great danger to the patient.
It is therefore necessary, as you see, according to the method I have described, of the patient's gallbladder and length, that you place the assistant in front of the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we have mentioned before. Then, the onion is cut in the urethra, and the tail is removed, and the copper is placed in the two incisions that I mentioned in the incision of the two hamstrings.
And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, only the excess that is over the natural end.
For if you cut more, you will hurt your voice and speech.
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two thumbs, and treat as long as it is healthy.
If the patient has a high fever, then it is necessary that you use an engine for the cauterization of the affected part.
And the manner of cauterization is to make it hot and dry. And the surgeon places the head in your mouth, and then presses the tongue on the instrument we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and confuses with live coal, if it is not too thick or too clear. and by using this instrument, the form is:
And if the head has a hair or puts medicine, like the hair of a mouse, and places the instrument in all the medicine on the eye;
When the patient's shoulder is dislocated, if it causes the saliva to flow and the mucous to drip from the mouth due to the medicine, if it does not descend to the chin and the throat.
Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the vein, as long as you see it is red and the sting of the medicine is calmed.
And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around no instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and tie the instrument all around the cotton in the vein, as long as the cotton is damp around the vein.
and do this until it is perfect, then leave it to dry, and it will be ready after four or five days.
And if you have experience in restarting the fire cautery of medicine, if it restarts, and after the cautery cleanse the excrement around the urethra, wrap it with linen, and clean what is outside of the medicine.
And if you have a fever of cold, and treat it with gargles as long as it is healthy.
This remedy is safer than the incision, only the cautery.
If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take a lamp, oil, oregano, rosemary, chamomile, and mint, and assemble all or none of them in one pot, and put in ashes, and boil.
And it may be well glued with strong earth, and it should have an instrument made according to this manner: And it should be of silver or gold, and the ends should be placed in the patient's mouth as much as possible until the vapor rises through the canal, as long as the canal is saturated;
after the wound has healed, as long as the canal is dry, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, because many things may come; and only do this if it is necessary for the onset of the abscess.
If this instrument is not present, then take a needle and make a hole in the cheek with it, if the mouth of the patient has not been too much bitten. For the needle's hole does not cause pain in the mouth, and it is a good cure together with the previous one.
Many times have I seen bones protrude from the throat or fish spines, or nothing at all.
Therefore, if you must see what you see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments, so that you can see the thing.
And if it does not open at all and is stuck in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach. By chance, if the thing is achieved through vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of millet, or a piece of dry bread; and it attaches to the sponge thread, and then glues together; and when it reaches the shoulder, if it sticks, and then it will be torn off;
and if it does not come off from this, if we use the instrument of pulling according to this form:
And let the instruments be corbes at the head if it can more lightly enter the mouth, and have the head lifted up; And if you do not touch the epiphysis, all will not live, and will not burden the bones too much.
And it is better that the patient uses the instrument, because it is needed or the thing is there. If the use is good, or he takes it further all the instrument correctly, as far as it goes.
of the throat's loose skin
No time is wasted in medicine, if I have said it in the division, by the treatment of medicines. And when it does not profit anything, then look in the eye of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument I have given you.
If you see the shoulder, if the bone is all in one piece, or if it has thin hairs that are worth nothing in this.
And if it is not worth anything, then take a hair from the head of a woman, and tie it around the neck of the patient, and then pull or cut off the hair, and do this often. And the patient's scalp is sweating all the time.
Then fill your mouth with cold water, and feel the saliva, and it often moves to your hand. And if the tongue feels the cold water, then stop.
And if it does not stop when we have said, and if the helper smokes asafetida on the instrument we mentioned in the irrigation of the eye;
Do this many times, because it feels like it is burning.
And the manner of the irrigation is if you preheat it or if there are charcoal bits, and it should be covered with a covering perch in the environment, and in the other end it should be the head of the instrument.
Then you gargle with the fumigation, and the patient places the head of the chain in their mouth, closes their mouth so that the smoke does not enter, but it comes out through the nose.
And now the patient will sneeze, and if it happens again several times, the fumigation is repeated.
And the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and bitter things, and does not drink water.
And therefore, the patient endures this treatment as ordered.
And the form of the instrument used to treat the nose, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles combs that may enter the throat. and it seems like the beak of a surgeon, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot hold on.
The forms of apothegms are, according to what the remembrance comes after another in this book, and they are different in piercing and size.
and it is in two ways that one is itself in its appearance, and because it has moisture.
And the second way is if the limbs are lying down or at rest.
For the head of the chief is different from that of the foundation, and the head of the lower limb is different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if in apothegms one does not have to cut deeply, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion.
If there are those who think they can discern when they should die, and do not die according to their completion, as amputations that are defective joints.
For when the head comes from difficult joints, and it is left as long as it is dry, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
If the amputation is defective, it is due to the principal limb, and if you delay the incision until the limb is dead, it will harm the principal limb.
If the foundation is defective, if the incision is not made when the limb is dead, it will harm the foundation.
And it is only necessary to make the amputation when the limb is dead, as if the foundation is defective, it will not be able to pass through, and the wound will be long, and a fistula will form. and cannot be cured in a great amount of time.
And it is necessary that you cut off the ear of the aposteme wound which bleeds according to the completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the fever subsides, and the relief of pain and bruising, and the debate and aguishness of the aposteme, and the other signs.
And it is necessary that you cut off the hole of the aposteme wound which is more dependent on the ear, and where it has opened.
And if the hole of the aposteme wound is long and deep, and it opens with the hands or fingers, or in the joints and arteries, and in all of them equally or not, without any bleeding. In those that are pricked, according to the pain of the member.
And when an abscess is formed in the member, if it is painful, then you should leave the puncture until it is confirmed to be well digested, as we have said.
If you do not follow this instruction, I will have to stop translating the text. and by chance they harden the lips and make them appear more beautiful.
And if there is no abscess that is felt according to the pain of the member, then it should be left according to the size of the blood.
And you must cut out small abscesses, small pustules. and in large abscesses, large pustules, and multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cut out the head, and close it. When I have become so old as I am now, and I am weary, then it is necessary to do it in the same way as they make bubbles.
If it is of those that are cut at three angles, and if it is of those that are cut like the thorn of a mirror, as well as those that are cut like the thumbs.
If it is of those that are cut into a specific size, and other sizes and appearances are coped with.
Those who have no head, if it is like a superficial wound, you must cut it through gradually.
And when the wound is large, and it has a great bowel, and you cut it, if you do not dig out all of the bowel in that hour, but dig out a part. Then comes the aposteme (stitch) to the other side, then no right thing is done. Do this many times with great care, until the bowel is all.
Meanwhile, if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying, or pregnant women, or old men. For the expectoration there is no time with the issue of the bowel, that by chance dies the patient, and you do not blame yourself.
Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have found your stitch, if the wound is bleeding, look at whether the wound of the suture is small. And if it is a flat measuring, then use threads of linen or cotton. If it is many abscesses, and there is fever, then it comes that you make a tent in each one so that they do not fight against each other.
If you have opened an abscess partly in leather, and it is healed, then it comes that you fill it with fine cloth or rough linen, and the limb will be better;
Then the bone, and the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if the evacuation of blood comes to your vein, if it is cold and wet, and the arm hangs down, and you gently put it on the bed many times.
And if the patient has lost much blood, and there is no relief, and the government and treatment are not effective, and the powders that I have said in my hands in this book, and if there is pain, and the abscess is nervous, then it comes that you make tents and fold the softened cloth in wine and olive oil;
If this is the case, and the leus is charnus, then it comes to pass that you must moisten your cloths in cold water and oil, or in wine and oil vinegar, just as we have said.
And then remove the abscess and pus, if it comes to pass, as soon as it is healthy.
And it comes to pass that you understand completely in the treatment of abscesses:
Or do I say what you must go before the treatment of abscesses and then this chapter?
When the head of the shoulder comes to many abscesses, and they are like ours, as if the thread of a grapevine, and there are some that seem like this.
It is either too fat or too wet, or both like pouls.
And if there are those who are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt that the patient will not bleed, then it does not matter.
And the measurements of the size if it is that you prove to all the instruments that are called "entromising," by which form comes after, what thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, they make it longer by adding more.
And when the moisture is seen, then shave off the hair that contains the moisture, because it will return to its original position as soon as it is left alone.
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present. if not, use vinegar and linen, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day. and keep the part that is more painful at night.
And then resume the thread, as before, the second day, and the pain, so long as you feel well but it does not last all night.
Then treat the wound with ointment according to the appropriate method, as long as it is healthy.
And if the abscess holds fat, and the grip is according to this form, then it will be long. And you gnaw your bones, and scrape off all parts, and use all your care to draw out the pimple or it will gout.
And if the artery is opposite, as I said after.
And if the abscess is large, and it is cut and cured as I have said.
And it measures the incision for the abscess and the wound, if it is more flexible, because there is less blood. And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or heads, and these were not from the mouth of an old woman;
and found the abscess to be like a sharp, rough, and bloody piercing, that could not be broken; and if none was made, it was as if a wound had been made like a piercing;
In other abscesses that come, the opening should be made as far down as possible at the base of the ear, to ease the bowels;
and they are cured as it is possible.
Often, the wound of the abscess is at the collarbone, and the stitches come out, and the skin becomes inflamed, and never once do they go to another part or close, and they become infected, and one bone is connected to another.
And each wart is properly located on its side, just like the knuckle and the tip of the finger that we have mentioned. and the appearances of these warts are many.
and the appearances of these warts are many. It has tissues that contain moisture, and it has malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
in the one that you see with good arrangement on the skin, and is similar to the color of the heart, and uniform in all parts and not rough as nerves of the artery or conductor, and is not rough.
if you must cut it with a knife, and burn in every part, and the two lips of the ear are hard like bones, if you can bear it, just as we have said about the fingertip.
And the thread is cut little by little, and be sure you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not tear it, that your hands do not slip, and do not cut too soon, that you do not cut more than you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol or some powders that stay in place, and draw the wound; and leave it until the swelling subsides, and the wound is softened, and dress it.
And when the blood comes out, if you return to your work, as soon as you have finished it.
Then wonder if your index finger is tired if it has a few small scabs, if the nails and the cuticles.
And if the cause of the scab is deep, then you must only cut off that scab at its root, but leave a strong double thread, and let it hang there without causing any harm.
Then use the wound of thin cotton to dip in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
If you cover the entire wound, if you manage to bring together the two lips of the wound, and hold them now, then there will be no excess due to the size of the wound. If you understand how to cover the root of it, and dig further, and cut as we have said.
If you understand how to cover the root of it, and dig further, and cut as we have said. Those scabs that hold excess skin, pierce them or make them wider.
And pierce them like the one mentioned before, depending on the size, then apply ointments and similar things, if it prevents further corruption. And when the wound is well-dressed, if the treatment of ointment involves charring, as long as it is healthy.
The ancients spoke and talked about the size of the neck. But I have never seen anyone who does this in our world, and it is their scripture of speech.
To those who have squinting, it is necessary that the neck called "epiglotis" be avoided. And if one cannot help in this way, because all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those who have aphonia in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the lungs.
When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it with three or four small incisions, passing through the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut, not touching the cartilage;
and they say that if it is possible to cut the epigastrium without causing any harm, and the vessels are not cut, then it is not dangerous;
And if the masters are unable, then it is necessary that the jawbone extends to the entire neck, then cut the cheek as far as it reaches to the chin; And avoid the veins of blood, if you see nothing, and then apply leeches, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the swelling of the shoulder that was forced to move by the broken arm and due to the lack of voice.
And leave the wound over the bone.
And when the hour has passed, if there is doubt about the dislocation, gather the two lips of the wound as much as possible, and cover it all so that you feel the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make the wound heal quickly, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim does not do anything until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is near death, and the lack of air is fatal. Therefore, one should address the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they die through the wound.
And they command the ancients to leave the wound oversized until the malady of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. Therefore, they command to stitch the wound and treat it, as soon as it is treated.
And I will tell you what I see. I see a maiden who is being cut, and she has a piece of cloth in her throat, and part of her clothing is torn.
I am called to heal, and I found it as if it were death.
I discover the wound, and I find the blood that came out of it, and though she had no veins or it led further than just the throat, it was due to the wound.
I hurried, and examined the wound, and cured it as soon as it was healthy.
and did not reach the damsel until she was red with shame, and returned afterwards to her condition.
because I said that in the cutting of the epiploon there is no pain.
This hernia is called "hernia of the neck," and it are some large hernias in the color of a thread, and it are much in women.
and there are in two ways: The natural world and accidents.
Nature has no engine.
Accidents occur in two ways: either they resemble large animals, and the other way is similar to an apoplexy that comes from our arteries. And if there is pain, and it is not possible to overcome it, then it is better to seek help from the physician who is small, and he will prove and search throughout the introducer. If you also find it as large as the fat one, and cannot be moved, then the case is like when we move the animals, and we cut through all its parts, if it has none. and pierce it well, and the cure is done as it should be, until it is completely healthy.
There are many ways of us, and I will tell you all the appearances.
and it is necessary that I know the entire difference between the born and the issued.
I say that issue is childbirth and fever, as long as the ebullitions are passed, and it is completed with the diarrhea. but the fever and the labor rest.
With the newborn there is no labor pain or fever or pain, and it contains I sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the cold heart, and it begins thus like a lump, and becomes large.
1. "And they are according to two appearances, either rough or wet, and of different colors as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the newborn, that you examine and first look at all the instrument called "dislocating" according to what the form brings out or the chapter that follows.
1. "The manner of incising the abscesses in our members is whether you prick more or less than you do in the abscess, and turn your two points again and again until you feel that the cuscus has perceived the keur, then that it is according to the size of the abscess.
1. "Then pull out the forceps, and hold tight as you jump.
1. "If the wetting occurs, it will have that color, just like with other abscesses as I said.
After the scalpel is cleaned, it is not moistened, if it is, then make it thick, and take it with pincers, and gently scrape each part of it and make sure the handle is clean with the nut.
and if you do not pull it cleanly, then take it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
For if nothing comes out, it will return to us many times.
And if it demands a piece, and it does not hurt you, then use the wound of some corrosive powders, close the wound, and apply soothing ointments to the wound, and cure other wounds as long as they are healthy.
If it is large, if it covers the two lips of the wound, and the care of him who enjoys char.
If the vein is battered and it is contrary or otherwise, if you hasten and use the lees of vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound presses, and rests the inflammation of blood; Then return to copper that which is due to the lack of out.
See these forms of the entangled stools, and are of three kinds: Large, moist, and small.
And they are divided into three kinds: large, moist, and small. And there are three kinds: large, moist, and small. The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
They are as sharp as the beaks of birds of prey, and are made of gold, silver, or iron, and are more easily bent yellow, and are more difficult to bend black to fit the corners of fistulas.
They come in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the purulence of the abscess.
The shapes of the claws are quite similar, as you can see here:
and if the claws have two holes of three kinds:
If those who have three squirels, and are of three kinds.
And if those who have two squirels, and squirels of one kind only, and are of three kinds.
And this is necessary in their limbs.
The head of these we make sharp, and of such they are that which does not cut as deep as one would like, because we do not harm the vein or the nerve.
And of these introducers, the amputations are returned in hand, so that the patient does not escape from the opening of the abscesses.
1. The dislocations occur in three ways. 2. They are either large, small, or misplaced, as you will see;
3. But only in the shoulder and leg, like hams, arms, and shoulders, and hands, and in similar parts;
4. And no other instrument is ever used, which resembles the forceps, according to this form, and one does not draw blood; and it is placed on none of the times to the shoulder that it can withstand the pressure of the veins and the arteries, and never returns according to this great form:
5. And no other men's thighs swell when they are trying to straighten them, as if they were female thighs;
6. And some are lame and swollen, and those who see them heal according to this form of this line, from .b. to .g.; Then scorch the fat, and then use the surgical wound with a heated iron, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it until it is healthy.
And if it is crooked, and is straightened as much as possible, and if it is inserted into the skin, then it should be done in two places, according to the similarity of wounds. If one end is held by the other at the end of each, then the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, and this line.b. jusc'a the line.g. Then scorch the leather that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and do what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, as long as it is healthy.
If it is not healed, or the incision is not completely finished, because the patient does not rest, or due to the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with clean, moist gauze in a corrosive ointment. and leave it until the dressing is soaked in sweat and grease, then change it as soon as it is healed.
Car en l'ovraige de cest chapitre, il y a souvent une évacuation de sang lorsque on ouvre une vaisseau sanguin, et incise une abscèse, et traitre des plaies, et extraire des arrow, et coupe des pierres, et des choses similaires. Où il y a doute et peur, et de nombreuses mort
Il est donc important que le docteur soit précautionneux lorsqu'il fait la réposition d'une dislocation de la poitrine ou de l'épaule, car il peut causer de graves dommages si il n'est pas effectué correctement. Si toute la bouteille qui est en l'apostème est vuidie, il est recommandé d'utiliser une plaie de cuir pour enlever le reste du liquide et de laisser les cotonnes jusqu'à ce que la bouteille soit complètement saine.
When the abscess resembles scabs, if it is as we have said in scales, and the wound bleeds, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
When the artery is injured, and the skin is cut, if there are many abscesses, and also the vein is exposed and infected.
and if it is by the artery, then it is cut long and even. When you feel your pain, if you feel strain;
And when it is by the vein, if we are put aside apart;
And it is madness to cope with this abscess, and at the same time when it is loose the bands and the grips and the knots and the eyes and out of others, and it is great pain; It is therefore necessary to avoid the care of iron, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is filled with arteries made by cutting through the skin long;
Then work the size of the bones, and then beautifully cut the arteries of the feet, until it is discovered;
Then, apply a needle, and perceive just on the other side, and draw the artery with a double thread of about two fingers, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then, do not move the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as long as it is not freed, and let the abscess be opened.
Then, perform the cure while the bone is not yet hardened, as long as the wounds are fresh. Then, treat this part with the appropriate ointment, as soon as it is healthy.
and if the patient holds their breath, it is because of the size of the vein, so if you must grip your hand with what you have in the abscess all around the limb, then pull out the needle that you hold in your hand and feel, and if it feels tight, then draw it from the other side. then close the incision, as I have told you, or from one of the two ends of the two fillets.
and if you doubt that the threads will not come out, then pull out another needle through all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then pull the stitch as much as the excess in the thread, then pull the excess of the gut and leave what is left.
Then wash it with vinegar and oil, then treat it with tents and bandages as much as it is healthy.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And this often happens with assistants and you must and in all places where there are joints, and it is the suture, and its color seems like the color of the heart, and it is in more dispositions with pain.
And when it is tightened, if it feels pain, and it is not much from the heart, but from the gut.
1. It remains silent about all parts, and does not go before being held, nor does it come undone, and the one who is in joints cannot be held by copper. 2. By chance, there is contraction. 3. And the one who is at the head or front, makes the leather at the spatulate.
3. And the one who is at the head or front, makes the leather at the spatulate. 4. If the abscess is small, then it should be held with nails and the cloth in its root.
5. If it is large, then the spongy bone should be spent and burned, then the bone and assemble the wound to its former state, and the cure is done when it is healthy.
There is no occasion in the womb and does not affect any other part, and it is a disease called "fuction" due to its appearance of "aus", and it has a subtle root, and the head is large.
and in some it are few and in others many.
I have seen one woman who had it in her belly which was more like "funks" than anything else, and it had no difference, and they were white, had a thin root, and were sharp, and they rotted away due to moisture.
I cut them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six. If you look at the flesh, it is wet, and the color of the root is pale and wet and of a subtle root. If the head is at the widest part of the pelvis, and they are in your presence, they undergo a fire cauterization.
If the head is at the widest part of the pelvis, and they are in your presence, they undergo a fire cauterization. For cutting, there are often too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not want to die, then cauterize.
And if you see the patient is bleeding and unconscious from the incision, take a piece of cloth well made, and tie it around the wound as we have said, and leave him alone.
And then restrain, and do not stop tightening the cloth around the wound until the wound stops bleeding, and then check the patient's sensation.
And if the roots are large, if it is not painful in the belly, but if you press well on the other side, then burn it so it does not re-emerge.
Then treat the wound, and do not press on the thigh that is of a different color, rough texture, and poor sensation, and lame.
For these are enchanted galls, and I will come to the cure of this chancre afterwards.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, If the appearance of the bowel comes from cauterization of a wound or a burn of scar tissue, and is under the belly and has some of the feces, as it does in other cases, or of sacs that cut through veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of ventosity.
And if it is by the rupture of the suture and from the exit of the bowel, if the color of the aposteme resembles the color of the heart, and it is light and causes pain in various ways. 1. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it returns, and by chance if it stretches, it enlarges the opening to the bath and with great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is light and easy to press, and it opens well when you press with your hand; do not constrain it.
And if it is due to blood, if it opens by these signs, the aposteme is large and hard, and it is flicked according to a certain quantity. And if it is due to varicosity, if it is swollen at the tip, and the patient appears to be due to arterial or veinal sanguination, or varicity.
And if it is due to varicosity, if it is swollen at the tip, and the patient appears to be due to arterial or veinal sanguination, or varicity. If it comes to pass that you let the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is from the intestine or the anus, then it comes that you instruct the patient to touch his tail, and it should be extended all around, then draw out all of the feces. Then command the patient to squeeze between your hands, then draw out the entire limb that you have indicated with all of your strength, then the half of the abscess is at the end of the great sciatic nerve. Then draw out the entire limb with a strong thread or a tight cord, and it should be free from all knots.
Then work the half of the abscess extended on the thread, and it should be your index finger, and you will feel the intestine. If you catch the hemorrhage early, if it disappears, and cut into the intestine near the stomach.
And if you catch the diarrhea early, if it reaches the bladder, and cut into the urethra to remove excess.
And if the artery is reversed or the vein, if it goes against the element, then return to your work and take two hooks, and cut off the testicles, and cut off the testicles in the same way you think you are doing.
Then drain the abscess with four hooks, and if you see, take out the hooks, and leave the leg as it was before it started to bleed, and let the dead part die on its own. If you catch it when it is subtle and permeates, then the treatment of what must be done, and cover the abscess as we have said.
If you catch it when it is subtle and permeates, then the treatment of what must be done, and cover the abscess as we have said. And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the joint of what must be done, and dry the joint.
The first sentence to translate is "dou We have said in the division of the appearances of the gumboil, and it is commented that one must cover with medicines, and it is commented that the cure of iron must be done.
And let us say that the gumboil is caused by the marriage, and great caution in its cure, and they tell the old one that when gumboli are in the joint or can be raised if like gumboli which are in the mammary glands, in the incision, and in similar cases, and it must be done entirely when it is at the beginning.
Not a single one has ever been cured before me.
And the work, when it is in its place or can be moved, is that you have never purged any black mud from the cauterant.
Then make it healthier if there is clear swelling, then cut the cauterant and put it in the leg to do the work.
Then your shoulder bones or joint, and all the hair falls off, and the bone leaves nothing behind.
and let the blood flow out completely, and press well on the wound with your hand or nothing, and if the dislocations make the blood flow against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize as much as it is not squeezed. then the treatment of another treatment until it is healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de We have said in the division of the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by fire.
and one should not touch iron in these two appearances: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a fatal thing;
therefore, when you treat ydropisie, also called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not work, look at whether the patient's condition is weak, or if there is another disease than ydropisie, if like all other solutions of the stomach and similar things; if not touching iron, for it has doubt;
and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease than ydropisie only, and he is not too young nor too old, then you should over: 1. Gently hold the patient's shoulder with your hands, and press their belly firmly at the lowest part of the ribcage, then take the spatula with the spikes in this form: And now, let us proceed with the second part. 2. and it should not be sharp if it enters but only if it comes to the intestine when it is picked up, and it cannot be cut:
3. then look if the dislocation is towards the intestines: 4. if it is necessary to cut through the abdomen, do so directly above the point where the needle was inserted: 5. and if the dislocation is due to disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side of the abdomen:
If it is by the mucous membrane, if it is on the left side, and only the surgeon should guide the knife along the incision that the superfluities do not flow onto the weak part of the body.
Then cut through all the hair with the instrument, and the skin, and lighten your hand on all the surrounding area between the hair and the skin as if you were scraping off a piece of nail or an entree.
Then cut through the skin as far as the surrounding area reaches the bone, and it is the axe that you use, then pull out the instrument, and it is the form of this one that you should know. And it resembles a silver snake, and is light or feathery in texture, and in the part of the small pore, and or costs on another part, third pore; and on another part, and on the first;
And it is cut like a quill, and is the form of the incision that the scribes make for the pen:
At the head of us, it is the allemande, so that when they strike it with the edge, now it goes under the instrument:
If you see the wound more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the surgeon dies from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he has cold hands, or he approaches to death:
But according to the quantity of her virtue, and according to the arrangements of her virtue in the maid's body, and her soul.
Then draw out the instrument and hold the wick, and it is held now by the steam that is smoking the hole that was made under the scar, according to what I have spoken, that you must do according to this manner.
Then continue the instrument the next day, if you see the maid suffering from this, and dip a little bit of wick.
Do this no day, and keep yourself from hurting as much as you can but a little bit of wick.
And if you doubt the patient's condition, and you allow them to drink water, if the cure of the grave or sand bath is done, and by means of washing or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes flushed; and the use of desiccating medicines as long as they are healthy, and cauterization on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the fever, as I have said before.
No child is ever born without having a fever in the tooth, or if the fever is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is too much to perceive at all, not even with the most delicate sensation, according to this form:
Then place or insert a small pin under the skin, and tie and cut the thread after three or four days, if it is seen to make urine, if it is closed, and make urine, and then put it back.
And by chance they do not cover, because the urine that comes out is not closed.
If the catheter is small, if it is treated with a tight clot, as we have said, if it stretches.
Those who do not have the knowledge of cutting in their chest are weak, because no child is born with the umbilical cord at the top of the thigh, because they cannot piss before they cut the cord. And they cannot deliver because the matter does not come out in time, and this is a serious disease.
And the manner of the operation is that if the midwife sees something moving on her back, it is the umbilical cord and the loop is as big as a feather, if the child is born in pain, so it should be.
And keep the patient from losing consciousness due to pain that often comes, and if it does, and the wound is clean, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
2. of the pustules of the scalpel Often come cold winds in the neck region, and it appears to be a bad appearance;
and in some it is malignant and in others not malignant;
If you are to burn them at the subcutaneous tissue, and cut and clean all of them, then put soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of the ointment is done as soon as it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, of putrid color and large size, then it comes that you will need cauterization.
When you have cut it, and the wound is clean, and it has part of the hair and part of the skin, if you must cut off the part that has the hair, and when it is healed, if the skin is whole.
For when you close the wound together, if you do not secure the head of the hair that it is not seen, and there comes darkness and corruption in the hair of the wound and out.
If all that is black and corrupt comes out, then put on the plaster of honey and flour which is made of the scraps of roasted peas and vines, then other cures until it is healthy.
And if blood is drawn, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
The fire cautery, if used correctly, can help in these ways: It is knowledge, at the drainage of blood, and in the corruption.
And if the head of the shoulder is corrupted and retracted, then it comes to pass that you bind or lead the shoulder with a cord, and the physician pierces it with a needle, and the patient suffers pain.
And when the hair of the shoulder arrives at those who have not been circumcised, or have had a wound or an abscess, then it comes to pass that you scarify it with the instrument, as long as the roots are loose, and are released from the shoulder of the shoulder in all parts.
and if this is a difficult thing to do, then it is necessary to shave the area without any hair of the beard and the mustache.
Then apply a layer of soft linen cloth dampened with cold water, so it does not stick.
Circumcision is not a continuation of scars like the others; When we perform this work of our own will, and in the best way possible, as it is our duty to do for the benefit of our children, and the lighter for health.
I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
For I want the greatest part of the masters and doctors who perform circumcision inside the day, with force, and on all occasions.
If it happens that the curtain is broken, and it has two threads, and by chance it catches on something and breaks more of it, then it will be even worse. Or they are recovered quickly, and there is great pain, and the wound is not securely closed, which is why there is severe pain in the member.
And during the healing of the finger, by chance the iron escapes and cuts the wound, and it opens many times and there is no healing and I want to see it.
Of the circumcision which is made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment because the forces cut both sides of the thread equally as well as without it.
For when you press your hand, if it measures evenly in I, then you hold all of it. but that the thread is well stretched over the leather.
And so the manner of the first opening if you think the child understands, that you do not tie the thread too tightly only, and then I will loosen it in all the ways you please.
Then I will tie it all right in your hands, and place the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see, and no one of the threads.
Then put your hand on the bone and blow or suck, and draw it up as much as the head of the bone is in. Then clean well the assembly of the waste, then tie the head of the bone with a double thread, then tie it opposite to the other line.
Then clean well the assembly of the waste, then tie the head of the bone with a double thread, then tie it opposite to the other line. And the tie you need for the second reading in the pouch and the index, pass between the two loops, then gently lift the handle at high speed and pull the head of the nail. Then leave the blood pouch alone, as it is the most difficult. And sprinkle powder on it and on the powder, with a damp piece of cooked beef, cut into thin slices and marinated in olive oil and vinegar, and let it sit for a day, and treat it again until it is healthy.
The form of the forces at worlding if this is:
The head of the shoulder is dislocated, and it cannot stay in place. It should be reset as soon as possible.
The error of mutilation occurs if the edges escape through the incision.
Therefore, you must extend the wound to your finger, otherwise it will result in gangrene.
And it should be held correctly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the wound will be lost, and then the cope.
And if the wounds persist for three days, and the surrounding area is swollen, then it should be left alone until gangrene occurs, and then it should be lightly burned.
If the cautery is as you see it, and you hold it from the part of the ginger, it will not harm you.
Treat the shoulder with things made of sour powder, which we have said or treated with powders, and if it cope well enough, it will be cured, otherwise it will not work.
Treat the shoulder as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine if it is from opalescent wounds, or scabs, or bowels, or gallstones, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra which is either at the top or bottom of the bladder, then it comes that the patient's pain is caused by the catheter being placed on his groins. And the catheter is placed on the side of the belly, and the abdomen is extended from the part below the back, and the patient's pain is reduced as much as possible. And therefore the bladder is constrained to express the urethra at the bottom, because the urine is discharged.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction of all the instrument called "siringue", and its form is like this:
and let silver thin hair be like the tail of a squirrel. and let the leash of a long and half palm tree be thin at the end.
And the manner of the urine's issue if it is that you take a double thread, and tie at the end of the wool or linen, and cut the end of the thread with the snare of the ingerence.
and cut the excess of the wool and cut the end of the ingerence, then anoint the ingerence with oil or burr and urine of beef, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the woman's vessel and the verge moist with olive oil and olive oil and German tincture.
Then lightly place the thread at the edge, as it reaches the root of the edge, then double the edge towards the side of the bulge.
Then pull the thread before it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient's pain coming from the empty thing, and this is done according to this order because either the conductor or the one who will be guided is turned.
Then the thread is all over the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then I take it further, and make the urine flow.
And repeat the thread as soon as the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient's pain.
When there are scorching or bloody discharges in the bladder, or when an abscess is formed and you see water and medicines distilling, then use all the instrument called "cathoscopy", and it is shaped like this:
She is closed, and if there is III pulsation: On one hand, and on the other, if you see;
and the wound is read by the physician, who knows it is well healed without addition, if we can treat the moisture, and bind as soon as possible;
And when you see your medicines running in the uterus, place the head of the steel needle in the moisture, and withdraw it at the point where it is;
If you draw the moisture with the steel needle, and then tightly bind the point where it is; If the moisture enters the uterus, and comes to the uterus now, if it feels the pain;
And it is the form of a delicate caustic whose use is to scarify the uterus.
And it is made of silver or lead, and it is the head above.
and does not adhere to the skin or the flesh.
Then take a sheep's bladder and apply the moisture that you have used to scarify the uterus, then place it between the two breasts to form a double-layered poultice, and heat the moisture over the fire.
Then cut the head of the caustic along the edge, then squeeze your hand over the uterus with all the moisture that comes out, as long as the patient feels that the moisture is entering the uterus.
and if you do not have a gauze, then take a piece of linen, and make a circle, and pierce it around the hole. then insert a strong thread in these wounds, then assemble the circle as we do with a nail, and put oil, sweat, and vinegar on it, and tie it in the instrument.
and do as you have done with the gauze, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the gauze.
From the incision
We have said in the division of wounds, and in assembling remedies.
and I said the difference between a piercing and an incision, and the signs, and in what size we must over it. and in the bladder, and in the vulva.
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the wound which is dislocated in the bladder often occurs in children, and it is a sign that the inflammation of the bladder is becoming more acute.
and if it is opened, and the vulva is grated, and it can be done many times, and then it becomes inflamed. and at the end of these wounds, they become infected.
and the cure is light for children until they are four years old, and it is grievous in the winter, and it is much more so in the spring, for those who are between winter and spring.
And the cure is less severe for those with large incisions than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the cure, if we cover the patient with cloths dipped in cold water, we must cleanse all the insides. For it never closes the wound.
Then take the patient by the shoulders and stand up, and move to the side, if the incision descends to the front of the bladder, and does not once reach the top of the leg.
Then place the patient between your hands in a comfortable position, and your hands should be above their knees, if the bladder is entirely tilted downwards.
Then gently and carefully touch it.
If you feel the incision in the spaciousness, then cut it now at the incision.
And if she does not feel any pain when touched, if your index finger is oiled with oil from the left hand, or if it is dry, if the other fingers are well-oiled. and the wound in its foundation, and want to pierce it, and when you feel with your finger at the top of the vagina.
Then press with your finger, and the wound should be in the direction that you see it is cut.
And instruct the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands that he extends with his right hand the curls at the top, and with his left hand to grasp the hair that is loose at the part where the cut is made.
Then he cuts the stump coping, of which this is the form: And they make between those who are between the corners and the foundation, not with a mill but at the side of the right shoulder.
And it should be above the incision, and the stitches should be either at the foundation or below, and the size should be large enough so that it covers the wound as much as possible, and should not be too tight.
by chance the pressure if it is at the foundation, which will jump further during work.
and you should check if it has part of the incision or angle, and margins. If it is cold outside.
And if the part that is wet appears as a glowing, and moves, whose exit is light.
If it has angles and margins, make the size larger.
And if it does not hold, then you must pull on the nails that are as sharp as a needle in the head, so that the piercing does not slip. Or if you break the delicate instrument pointed at the head.
And if you do not break it in time, then the wound will widen and if it is not cracked, then pull on it with vitriol.
And if there are more piercings, if the largest one is at the top of the vagina, then cut it off, then pull it out, and the small ones afterward, if there are more.
If it is not treated promptly, it can lead to a large wound and further injury. For two things come to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes out without being able to close it;
but you should try to draw it out, or use tweezers to remove the hairs, as long as you draw it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, if you use the wound of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and draw it out, and then put on soft cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to ease the post-extraction soreness; Then the patient tilts his head, and does not loosen the knot of the thread.
When you dislocate it, if the joint is well oiled with oil and sage, then the cure of ointment dyefacient and basilic ointment, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess comes in the wound and corrosions, and the blood is blocked in the vein, and it is held by the urine, which is in a similar way that without jumping with the urine: Bites that are deep into the wound, and remove the pus, because if it remains, it will cause the vein to rupture, and bleed.
Then cleanse the wound with warm water and salt, and aid it in every way that you know, as long as it is healthy.
And it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you lie the thighs, and gather the medicines on the leg.
And if the piercing is small, and it is directed by the bone, and it is not broken, and the urine cannot be discharged. If the treatment of what I say does not satisfy you, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for the size of this treatment. I have already done that.
Prepare to forge according to this form and make it at a third angle, one ton.
Then take the file and pull the ligature around the edge of the wound, so that it does not get caught in the vein.
Then lightly cut the wood along the edge of the wound, until it reaches the piercing. And turn the wood in your hand at the piercing, as much as you can, until you feel the other side of the piercing.
If a lot of urine comes out, then press your hand on the part that is being pulled away from the piercing that is being loosened by the edge. If it breaks, and it falls with the urine, and it causes pain to the patient.
And if you do not do this for any reason, if the child's leg is not cut and the other is, then they make a groove between the two limbs, then the stitch is taken out, and the sewn-up wire is removed, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound. and care for it until it is healthy.
of the piercing of women
Only one piercing should be made in women, and if there is none at all, if the care is grievous and defended by three things:
one is that by chance the woman is virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a well-behaved woman who has been deceived by mirrors, even when she is young;
And the third method, if by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands.
And the fourth method, if by chance the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it requires a more profound size. And if you must dismember, then choose a skilled hand and cut along the vein, and if you cannot find one, then use a subtle knife.
This is a wise practice in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command of the examination of the wound. and look well, see if the woman is a virgin:
and look well, see if the woman is a virgin: and then it is necessary to set the bone or the nail and prick the hole;
and if she is tight, then the bone is loosened and she should set her bone or the nail with the helper, and she should press and hold her left hand on the vagina;
if she is tight, then it is necessary to loosen her bone so that she can move it slightly from the entrance of the vagina until she reaches the root of the thigh;
then, press on the hole in the thigh at the root of the thigh against the soft tissue, where it is most painful, and feel the hole in that part; and does not move his shoulder away from the incision or socket, and it should be the first small one.
and does not move his shoulder away from the incision or socket, and it should be the first small one. then cut the skin in that size, if you feel the wound is deep enough that the hole can come out further, and consider that many methods of holes are:
it is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and rounded, and which have veins:
If you want to know the appearance to know the end.
And if it is not sharp, if you put vitriol on the bone, and hold it for an hour until it is not burned:
then return to your work, until the hole is out, and have stitches that I told you in the extraction of the hole to help you in your work:
And if it is not set without pain, and that is the artery that is cut, if one puts powder on the shoulder and stretches it tightly and does not continue this, and leaves the wound and does not touch it, by chance the patient will die. Then treat the wound.
And when the pain of the wound is eased, and it is read, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is healing.
Wet is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white soap, which contains the urine of the beast.
And is called "soap" and has never been properly in the urine of the beast, if one cares that it is another animal's urine. And that is the flesh between the white smoke that we have spoken of.
And there was nothing else. And the generation of this sweat is due to the lack of it coming from the bladder, and it is expanded that matter.
And never does it come from percussion on the flesh, and this moisture is of many colors. Or it is flushed, or without red, or black, or white water, and it comes more.
And this is the sign to assemble it, for if it is white smoke that we have spoken of, and the wounds are long as we have said, and it does not open the flesh, for it is moist throughout.
If it is moist in its own cloth, and the abscess is closed with a part of the bladder, and because they think it is other ointments.
and if the moisture is between the hide of the thighs and the white ointment, and it is felt well.
then when you see the color of the moisture, if you press on all the introducer, with what form it is before. According to what comes after the introduction, judge whether it is dependent or independent.
And when we cauterize by fire, if it comes that the patient is healthy according to what could be and the fullness of his chest.
Then the sowing on his back, with something high, and then put him to sleep with clothes.
If the patient feels pain on their side, and commands the attendant to pull to the other side, extend the finger at one of the two ribs closest to the knee.
Then take the spatula, and cut the tendon between the two long ribs until you reach the point of the finger, and make sure your fingers are straight and facing upwards, marking the tendon with white fat, and scrape it gently so as not to cause pain.
Then pierce the white fat with a sharp needle at the large opening, remove all the fat, and then put your shoulders, and stretch the white fat.
And do not touch the curvature of the bones, but only the sutures. Coping all or by pieces at once the costal cartilage of him, if you do not know how to do it well, then it will return the ague.
And if the head falls on your shoulder, then reset it in the shoulder as soon as you have completed the operation on the suture.
Then assemble the two halves of the curvature of the bones with a suture, then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healthy.
And if you find the head corrupted by another disease, then cut the veins that are suspended, doubting the dislocation of the sutures.
Then pull the ring on all the suspensors, and remove the nail, and treat it as we have said.
And when it is healed, it is assembled in two parts, which are the branches; if you pull the other part as you did the first dislocation, then put the blood in the wound, and put fine oil on it;
if you pull the other part as you did the first dislocation, then put the blood in the wound, and put fine oil on it; and put another fine linen on vine and oil, and put it on the two suspensors, and doubled strips of cloth, and tie it to all the part that is according to this form:
Then take the strips, and use the lace made according to this appearance and are assembled by sewing on the waist of the braies, and one of the heads is pricked at the back, and the other at the part that is pointed;
And the other two heads are situated on the other two sides, and all the restriction is restricted in the loop of the bow.
And no time is there for this fire cautery in the sharpness of the leather, and it is that you use the subtle cautery cultell, and cut the hair of the fingers, and it should be washed as we have said, if the white fluid that contains the ague is discovered.
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white fluid with the bones, and burn at this subtle cautery cultell.
And cut in all the ways you can think of, as long as you are careful with everything.
and keep the testicles from being touched by the hand
and consider this work to be more beneficial; and keeps away from evacuation of blood, and makes sure the size is correct;
and if nothing else causes harm, such as an abscess or evacuation of blood, or anything else, then treat what is causing the harm according to what has been said;
And if the patient is not strong, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horrible nature, then if there is perforation, as I have said, and you are sure about the meanings we have said that the head of the shoulder is the first to be set, then place the patient on their side; Because the aposteme is at the end of the part of the bone that is large for all the cartilage, and the perforation is long and narrow.
And if the perforations are wide, then all the wounds will heal quickly.
Then place gauze on the wound, tie it tightly, and let the wound heal as long as the wound is healthy;
And if the boil pus comes out of the wound in the mouth of the wound, then you must cut off a needle or the instrument used to treat the abscess, because it forms like this in front;
And enlarge the wound, and sharpen the edges that return, and it will be assembled after six months or more, and when it is assembled, as before, and then the patient will endure the pain of the joints.
Sharpen the edges of this ramification in several ways, because it seems to me that you should leave it alone.
And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say that all abscesses come from corruption and also from cold. and it is for the most part true.
It is to be known by excessive sweet and acrid humor, which is expanded by cold or by percussion.
And the color of the suture according to the color of the corpse. And there is no pain, and the suture is grievous.
And by chance, some sutures are grievous and painful, of a strange color, and no veins or arteries are ever found.
When it is from an artery, then it is known by the arrangement of the suture, when you press on it with your fingers. And it is necessary that you touch it.
That which is made of veins is known by its arrangement in expression, and can be quite well made according to this shape, and according to the others. And when you catch the head of the shoulder, then it is the hip that moves up, and the arm is pushed down with white sugar, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the hip.
If the hip is already swollen with these charms, then it is necessary to draw the hip, and catch the shoulder.
And if it is stuck with sugar, or in the veins that are dilated, then it is necessary to deliver all of this, and the shoulder catches up again.
And if the birth of the child is from below, and it is stuck, and you manage to free it all, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, if you use the smooth woolen wound with oil of rose and wine, then apply other cures as needed until it is healthy.
These are some abscesses enveloped in an envelope similar to the bog, with the softening of the joints, and the patient groans as it goes.
And the treatment of this disease is well-presented and effective as in this case before, and we will tell you the method of the patient according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you put the patient on his side, then lift the suspender of the hairs away from your two shoulders, all the clothes that are near the edge, and tie the masters, and extend them as they are.
Then cut the spatulum large enough to pass through the veins where they are found, and then scrape from every part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then she cuts a thread or it has two threads, and she ties it to the first part where her eye came out, and she ties it to the other end. Then, the copes are cut straightly according to the length of the corpse, and the decayed moisture is removed.
Then, treat the wound as with others, or if it is an incision, so that no one will notice that a tooth was removed.
For there is no harm in this, and all the surgeons come to see, so it is necessary to treat the wounds on all the surgeons. If he loses his strength due to the incision of the veins, and they become dry and cannot be helped.
The effects of this operation are that it comes by section or scar, or extension to the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines hang down from that rupture to one of the groins.
And this rupture is either by scar or extension of the intestine, and these two methods cause the following:
or by percussion, or jumping, or burning, or lifting of the groin, and in similar ways.
And the signs when it is extension by scar are that it comes with small and small openings, in long tents, and there is no sudden coming. And it remains equal until it reaches the stomach, because the food presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is rupture of the tendon, which makes pain come at the beginning, and it is the grief faix appearing divers times, not far from the skin, and it is because of the exit of the intestine and the wound at the end of the tendon.
And no time does the circles descend with the intestine, and it is held back, and great pain is suffered by the patient, even when pressed.
In these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
And the manner of the incision if you command or the helper to put the intestine in their hand at the edge in the wound, if they can enter. Then it is severed between your shoulders, between your hands, and gently pull on the cords.
Then the neck is cut at the base, and cut all the hair of the long coat. Then cut the tendons of the legs according to what you have experience in opening the wound, and they should be able to enter.
Then the scorched skin that is full of hairs, as long as the white skin is not discovered in all parts.
Then place your index finger in the area where the hair is taught, between the white skin that is full of hairs and the second skin, and go until you reach the end of the thigh, and then between the second skin.
And then remove the left hand from the hair of the thigh, and the white skin is at the top of your right hand, and gently pull the leg towards the tail. And instruct the minister to extend the leg at the top, and release that which is behind the thigh.
and you want your two to if there is no intestine wrapped or white and if you find nothing else, if the bowel is in the stomach.
then use a needle or if it has a thick thread made of 10 threads, and the bowel is in the anus, which is after the skin of the hips. after the size, then cut the heads that appear to have threads, as long as there are 14 threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the anus, which we mentioned is after the skin of the hips, with a strong thread of 2 parts. Then wrap the heads of the hairs, and they form two parts, so that no thorns can enter into the veins, as the cauteries do not hurt. Then tie the string according to the first long line, and then leave a piece of cloth that is not too tight, so as not to cause pain to the greatest part of the wound. And then the rest according to the roundness of the ear.
Then cut in the part that is too thin for the skin, as we have said before.
Then, spread ointment on the rough hair with oil, and apply it to the wounds, and it will heal the one we have mentioned. For no time is this cauterized the white skin that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of the evacuation of blood. For this happens many times, and leaves the ointment for it to grow on itself.
And if it is late in the evening, and if it is heated with hot water, and it is applied as we have said, then it will grow.
Then, treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healthy.
of hernia caruncle
In this matter, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
And the ancients said that it is made if it is like the ram's testicle that is assembled with the veins, in a manner that you link the vessels, after cutting it lightly at the base;
Then come to me, and cure the abscess of that which operates, as long as they cry out.
and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
No time comes to raging wounds, unless we have said so, and open it.
and no intestines come down, and if they do, it's a pity, and repair all hours.
and if he grows too much in this point, if he thinks the wound or syphilis, as long as the intestines come down.
and this comes from the extension of the gallbladder which is in wounds, because we have said, since it is extended, then soften and narrow the intestines and open.
If the injury is treated by cauterization, as we have said before.
And no time has it ever been cured in this way: And is that the patient's shoulder is tucked between his hands, then pull the limb of the dislocation as much as possible according to the amount of III dois.
And then remove the splint that is soaked in oil, then take the hand and put it on the limb appearing to have much sweat.
And he presses on the abdomen, then cut the two limbs appearing to have much sweat from his hand, and cut both.
Then the head is pulled out, and does not catch on the face or extend the urethra or anything else, as I have informed you in the care of the gut of the intestines. Then the treatment is through the treatment of wounds.
Then the treatment is through the treatment of wounds. When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleaned and healed, as soon as it is healthy.
The scar is bound, and has no appearance in the healing, and the cauterization is more effective at a distance from the wound, and closer to health.
of the softening of the leather of the bones.
Many times the hair of the eyebrows is plucked in men, because the strings that are densened are softened, and it can be seen.
And it is a task, when one sees the patient being cured, to make the patient sit on his heels, and the hair that has been plucked is cut on the natural hair.
Then gather the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, the first surplus of softened leather is at three stitches or four firmly.
Then pass between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed, and close the thread.
1. "dou chastrement" translates
Since scarring is forbidden in our law, and because I think it would be best not to mention this in this book.
and is necessary for only two ways:
One way is to measure the scar in response to being asked, and in the scar the treatment.
And the other, because we often have to fasten some animals for our help, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
I say therefore that chastening is done in two ways: either by attrition or by burning.
In the one we do by attrition, make our seat the animal's hottest part, as long as it is softened and while. then pull on it with your hand, as long as it is returned and you no longer feel it.
Of chastening of length: It is necessary that you tighten the animal, and press the hide of the joints to your left hand, then lift the suspender, and then do it on each part of the eye until you have well burned them.
and he leaves no small amount of soap and the fine soap that is for the veins.
and this manner of fasting is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because in attraction nothing is desired except for pleasure, by which the beast desires luxury.
then treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de fe
Hermofaride is according to two methods for men: one is that between the two members it is open as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or if it has hair, and never in cutting the urine.
And the other kind is in women, and has as its lips like a girl's and the lips.
And the cure of the stomach and hunger if you touch all the loose charms, and cure them as other wounds.
In the second way, men whose urine leaps through the skin of the foreskin, if there is no care.
A tentative is a loose char that is placed on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see. And no women have ever had such as this, and it is the cure.
It is necessary that you stretch the superfluity of the tentative with your hand or fingers, and lightly grasp it.
and do not alert too much in front, because the cure depends on the patient's health, then the other cure as soon as it is safe.
and to another char that is in the mouth of the mother, and the employs, and by chance it fell, and it was like a crow, and for this they called the old "crow's disease. If it is necessary to copy it, as we have said, and to cure it as soon as it is healthy.
Erratic if it is due to the nature of the woman not being well informed, or the pustule is small. and it is natural by birth, or accidental by a disease that came later.
and it is natural by birth, or accidental by a disease that came later. or it is due to a sharp char that sticks or subtle facial hair, and it is made in the mother's mouth, or on the cheeks, or chin, or wherever.
And then comes the design, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have to have.
and the knowledge of this is by the rule of the dance.
When the patient feels pain, if they want to stop or continue.
If it is hard to scratch, and it is like the cheese, if you hurry, and they turn into:
put your two indices together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs.
Then the cheese forms, as long as the hard scratch is over, and the overs are on their sides.
Then take wool and oil, and put it on the cheese, and put it under the woman's chin, and make her hold her mouth closed every hour, so that it does not stick.
And if the pain is hard and fast, then you must tie it with a thread like a sail cloth.
If the head is dislocated, it is due to great exertion, if the spine and chest are involved.
And use the remedies that are known to draw blood, such as blood-letting herbs, incense, and an abundance of urine.
Then make a wide cut, if the wound cannot be stitched.
And it should be long, and a clean cloth tent is made.
And continue with other treatments until it is healed.
2. And when the swelling comes from burns, if it is necessary to cut according to this manner, do not be afraid of being enchanted. 3. For the enchantment that is in the swelling, it should not be touched with force.
The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de Morsel wounds are openings of veins that do not become accustomed to being pierced, and when morsel wounds become large, they become the lump.
In the division of appearances and signs, I will mention those that require treatment.
I said that both emorroydes and ulcers, when they are formed in marriage, do not appear to the touch, unless it is by the force of the cure.
Those that are in the mouth of the wife, one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then remove the thorns from the elderbush, and pulverize the leaves into medicines restricting blood loss, as well as those of dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then boil the herbs an hour, then let them cool in cold water.
And if the blood flows out, then let it come in a decoction of sumac and the leaves of grapevine, pomegranate, and rosemary, and similar things. Then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and hazelnut, and apply it to his back.
If it becomes dislocated, it is bad. If not, I make him sweat on the back and feel the bones hurting.
Then take in ginger juice or almond juice with wine vinegar, and sweat at the back.
And when the abscess has healed, treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the spicy herb thyme, so it should be covered like I said. And then treat it as soon as it is healthy.
Many forms of abscess come in the marriage, like gangrene and puerperal abscess and herpes and fistulas and abscesses and hemorrhoids and chancroid, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, in this treatment, I recommend treating the abscess that comes with the marriage, which is not the usual abscess but is caused by boils.
1. If you see the sign of fire, then look at whether the patient is holding their breath at the beginning of their arrival, and from cold and fever, and if it becomes red, then you will see it. 2. However, do not rush to use forceps, but make the patient wait until the pain is eased.
3. Then make the patient lie down on the bed, and support their head with two pillows, and straighten their legs and gather their toes as much as possible, with the knee deflected from the leg.
4. And let their knees be expanded, and put their hands on their thighs, and hold them well with a belt.
Then follows the pain from the left side of the chest, and the instrument used to open the mouth of the marsh comes out;
and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being used, you fix the rait first to know the size of the mouth, so that what comes out of the instrument does not exceed what it should be and does not hurt the patient. And if the rait is larger, then it is necessary to cover the size of the mouth with cloths, so that the rait does not hurt.
And it is necessary to put the instrument's horn in the mouth and adjust the instrument.
And when the sutures are opened, and it is made with the hand smooth, if it meets at the head, at the temple.
And when the wound is seen, if it comes that you must put in the plague softened in olive oil or in green oil.
And put the tent of the wound at the end of the marrow, and put under it the marrow and the pierced one that is clean softened in vinegar or salt.
Then the care after two days of dressing, as long as it is healthy.
And never lift the wound and the plague by cloth of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or the roots of lis and Aristolochia are cooked. Then comes the application of ointment.
If the wound is treated with hot iron, then you must keep yourself from cooking with it, but we have said in the division how to do it.
of childbirth Mastery is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman press her abdomen, and desires to smell the aroma of the herb.
However, hurry to help the child birth. You should know that this childbirth is according to nature's figure, and it is the second one following the first.
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her abdomen if the child is about to be born.
For when he descends from his first child, if it is the second one following him, and the marriage is made with his superfluities through good cleanliness.
And this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For there is no time when it comes to its full strength, and it comes to the chest or head, or hands, or the stomach or belly, and it is converted by chance or its own will, and through other harmful figures.
If it is skilled in the dance, so that it is wise and subtle in these matters, and warns against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures of what one must help with.
If the child comes to its father naturally, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtues of the child are weak, then if it is placed on a saddle or the women hold it.
and its nature of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then pour the ball between its two small stomachs, which is its form: and cut the second one, and cut it as much as the moisture that is left to be seen;
and cut the woman's belly as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to mix the woman with muskellunge oil with olive oil;
then I will make it dress and stir for a while, and hold its mouth and nose for an hour; if it is now the children;
If the hands are dislocated, then you must first gently lift them slightly. And if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and gently lift the feet towards her. Then lower the bed onto the ground, and make the woman lie down so she does not fall while standing.
If the hands cannot be inserted, and the child is dead, then take the hands at the corner that is in front of you, remove the child, and reset it gently.
Of the child's foot When the child comes to its feet, if it is not possible to put them on high. Then the thorn is slowly removed as much as possible.
Then the needle is gently pulled and extended a little at a time.
Can it jump out of its place if commanded to, and I make it extend further by stretching? If it jumps out, may God help us.
And if it does not jump as we have said, if it wobbles a little, until it is in accordance with the natural figure. For then it becomes lighter.
And if it does not jump out, we will use muslin cloth, olive oil, and melted wax, and all in the mortar. And apply it according to the nature of a woman's skin, then I will make it stay in place until it dries on the ribs.
When it is softened by heat, I cut it with a knife, put it on fire, and leave it for an hour. Then I put it on the fire and make it boil, then I stretch its mouth and nose, and I press the stomach lightly, as its baby is now jumping.
Of the child's issue when it is born When the child comes in this form, if I put my hands on it quickly and often. Then I tie its neck with a string, and I hang its feet down, and then I open the door. And I fold my hands quickly and often, and then I press the hands on the stomach, and I pull the legs apart as much as possible. And if the child does not jump, then take his feet and make them form, then make them turn around, then pull your hands. and if the child is small and small. and command the woman to give birth as much as the child will come.
of the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand It is necessary to engineer to bring the hand. If we cannot bring it, then lift the woman up and go.
If she cannot move, then I will make her stand on the bed and bend her legs.
Then stretch the muscle that I have told you about.
If it does not become a child, if it is placed on its side, then it studies the return of the hand. And the child according to its natural form, and it is stretched, and it commands that it be pulled as much as the child can hold.
of the issue of the child from its neck, and have expanded its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother It is necessary that the dance paints its hand, then it turns a little and lightly, and the child.
And when it is equal, if it is placed on the muscle of another and oil, as we have said, then it commands that it move slightly and lightly;
And when you have done this, if it is placed on its side, and it commands that it be stretched. The patient should then try to move the dislocated joint as gently as possible, without causing further pain or injury. 2. In the same manner for all subsequent ones.
2. In the same manner for all subsequent ones. When the patient tries to move the dislocated joint in this manner for the rest of their life, if the second joint also becomes affected, as long as there is moisture present.
And if the child can hold on to their face and neck, as long as the pain does not become unbearable, and they do not die.
Then give the child soothing medicine, as you have instructed, and command the woman not to touch it at all.
From the issue of the twins It is said that twins are born many times, and never after the third or fourth time. And this is a strange thing, and it doesn't happen often. This is also a strange thing, and they don't live long, they have no name.
This is also a strange thing, and they don't live long, they have no name. I know that they are multiplied, and they are destroyed by the wicked one who decides them, which is bound to the abscess.
And never have they come naturally as all at once, as we have said.
And if they come seriously, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and it is done quickly and lightly what it does. and do it as it should be saluted. Of more children
1. No time are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the sweet glorious wheat, and cover that the wild dance covers everything, as if by chance something similar happens. 2. If it is done according to what is necessary.
Of the dead child
3. When you treat the woman who has given birth to a stillborn child or is in her belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to deliver with your hands; 4. If it is necessary that you cut that the woman is of healthy virtue and has no accident or dies;
If it comes to pass that the woman is pregnant on her back, and her head is inclined downwards, and her legs are raised.
and the midwife applies the second degree burn, or if she is in bed if she is not treated for the descent of the child.
Then anoint the mouth of the midwife with moist oils of olive, mustard, and fenugreek, and the seeds of flax, then take her hands away from these oils and these ointments.
Then lightly bind her wrists, then let the legs be loose or she bites the nails that are capable of being bent at this time, and wait until the child is descending from its head.
If the shoulder bone is seen in the arm, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the ear, or on the beard, or in the eyelid, or near the ribs, and if it is felt to be stuck, then it should be freed with care and the costal cartilage.
And it is necessary to scrape the shoulder bone with your left hand, and place the feather between the thumb and index finger of your right hand, and gently pull it, and free the shoulder bone from any of the places we have mentioned until it fits into the empty state.
Then find another bone, or if you are skilled enough, if the extraction is equal;
and then the joint is aligned by moving from both sides, and the patient's hand should be held firmly, if like this is the shape:
And if a part is loose, if there are any of its two oils on that side, and take out the other side, and handle the other part:
And if it does not come loose, then put this bone or higher up, and do as much as it comes out completely:
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by traction, then it should be wrapped around as much as possible, until it is completely: Then the copious application is in the joint of the heel or elbow, and it is necessary that you apply it with the other hand, and then put on the shoe.
And if the child's head is large and comes out with difficulty, or there is a crowning present, then you must separate the sharp spatula between your two hands, and pull the head and remove the crown. or you can put it in the instrument called "almidach", if the form comes with the forceps or the cauterization that follows it.
and then you can apply the child naturally with a large head.
Then, treat the bones with nails, and if the head of the shoulder jumps out, it is pulled by force as much as possible, even if it is bent, until the moisture that caused it comes out.
And if it cannot be extracted, if it sticks to the skin as you pull,
And if it is bent at the belly or the ribs, then you must push it as much as possible until the moisture corrects it.
And if the child is among its flock, if it is the light attraction, and the milk of the mother is light.
And if it is twisted at the belly or the anus, then you must twist it loose with your hand. And if you stretch the belly or the anus as much as possible, until the moisture corrects it.
And if the other member becomes inflamed, and the shoulder is swollen, if the pain is great, then the person draws their hand back from the joint, and pulls it out of the mouth of the joint. Then they either cut or split, and they take it out.
And if the mouth of the joint is narrowed by the wound that it has come from, and there is no way to open it, then it must be managed with moist and light things. And the management is applied, and it is softened and made moist and cool.
And if the child is crying on its chest, and you put it down equally, then manage it as we have said in the live child.
If it is not possible, if the bone breaks into pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, make sure to follow the instructions we have given for the aftercare.
And if blood comes out, if it is put in a washcloth to stop the bleeding, and other treatments are made.
And I see a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another and was told that it would die, the other. After long time came some abscesses in the flesh, and inflamed as soon as they were opened, and began to cause great pain.
I was called for the cure, and I thought long time, and could not soothe the wound.
I used strong astringents for great attraction, and after some days more. I was surprised much, because the belly has no bones.
If you thought that it was bones of a dead child.
I want the wound, and with my hands I will treat it as much as the woman was in better condition. and the woman held her breath for a little while, and there was a little blood;
and I did not remember this chapter to be because when the master saw an extraordinary thing, he thought to help.
Here comes the first sentence to translate:
and at the turning of the head of the shoulder. However, the corner should be more subtle and narrow, and should be flat or rounded.
and the mouth should be of a due length, and the margins of the trees should be long, and half as long as a palm. and the shoulders should be of two joints of this same bone, which are closed on one side and open on the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these joints are closed in the mouth of the shoulder to open when turning the head corners.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat board or beech, according to the appearance of the tacks. and it has two joints, as you see, of a palm of long wood, and they must be wide.
and when you see the mare open wide with all the instruments, if you place the woman on her side and the thighs over, then adjust the joints together in the mare, and hold the end of the instrument's handle between your fingers. then use your hand on all the instruments, as you have done with the tacks evenly, according to the amount you see open the mare's mouth, until it stops making noise that you can hear.
These instruments are all around us, and their appearances are multiplied. And when you look at them, the more they work, the higher they become in number.
2. If you do not despise the instrument that you have not yet examined, because its needs are not easily satisfied.
When the second child is retained in the womb, if you command the midwife to release the hair, and then the placenta comes out, and your hands are forced to the mouth and nose. And if she jumps for joy at this, it is well.
If not, then I can, and make a pincushion or cupping glass, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the child, such as calamine, rose, anise, chamomile, cascarilla, and century plant. All these herbs, or none of them, must be cooked or placed on fire.
Then place a cain or pertus that can be burned, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and heat it until the vapors come out of the mare.
Then the dressing is applied, as we have said. If the second part is fast.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not worse, then order the physician to take her left hand in oil of sesamum or musk, and then blow into the mouth, and then apply the second one. And when she finds it, if she pricks and extends it little by little, so that the mare does not resist the extraction.
but the goal is to move lightly to the left and right, then pull it out. if it comes and comes out.
And if the mouth of the wound is closed, we have said the treatment is to suture and fumigate with herbs.
And if it is not all of what we have said, then keep that you do not pull out;
but what is in the mouth of the wound, you should tie it to the woman's thigh, then dress with ointment tetrafarmacone. if it is purged and reset, and it comes out correctly.
But if it comes out with bad smell from the stomach and head, and pierces the physician. If then come fumigations suitable to this:
no one of the old has experienced fumigations of garlic and dry figs.
The form of the instrument is such that it burns the woman with the retention of flowers and the second wind if this is:
And it seems like a dog, and puts it on the head subtly in nature, and the large ones under the fire.
and if the fumigations are on the coals, and the ash as it is, and another one begins again.
Many children are born who have not felt the foundation, but it has been swept with some subtle soap. If it comes to the point that he cannot cut through the flesh with his blade, and does not cut with a sharp one, and roughens the skin without touching it, then...
Then he should grind his blade on vine and oil, and apply the ointment as soon as it is sharp.
And if you doubt that it does not stay, if you put a catheter in its place and leave it hands free, and it is able to move when the child sees them going into the rooms.
And never comes a wound or abscess that is soothed by salt. If it comes to soothe that wound or abscess with salt... If you apply it, as we have said of the dog's bite.
Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow when they come from the delve of the foundation, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one or more.
When that node is old, if it is worked on, and the moisture is removed with soft flaps or subtle bows, and they are never formed into fistulas.
They are known by the fact that they are caused by either elimination or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance, some fall.
And if the fistulas are in the bladder and half in the vagina. and reach the joint of the thigh and the knee.
And it is known that the fistula is not present at its base, and does not have a fistula. And it is that you cut your index or foundation, and insert a small needle of iron or silver into the fistula when it has no kinks.
And if it has kinks, then insert a small tent of silk or horsehair, as soon as you feel the tent or hair in your hand.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no bleeding, no vomiting, or wind, as we have said. Make sure it does not pierce through. If you feel pain.
And when the fistula is present in the bladder or conducted from the urine, if it leaks and cannot be stopped by medicines.
And if it pierces through the joint of the thigh, as soon as it reaches the knee. If it does not have twisting and the cause of the pain is not known, then it is because there is no remedy for it, and no medicine can be applied to alleviate it.
And in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of the proud who enter into them.
In the one that is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the physician's hand is between your hands on his back.
and he gently lifts the legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly. Then cut around the hair, or if it is knotted, as long as you can until the tent comes off.
If the patient feels pain at the foundation, it means that the tent has been cut too short, so you should cut it off.
And if you feel between your fingers the hoof or the horn, then cut it off, and check that it is straight. If you cannot trim it with a knife, do not try to cut it off.
It is difficult to say whether one can cut it all, but this is rare.
And if it helps, if you make the fire cautery subtle according to the size of the fistula, as described earlier. and the bone is very hard in the fistula as it approaches the foundation. and do this two or three times until you feel that these points must be assisted, which resemble a pen of feathers;
and then the treatment of tented wounds is rolled in burrs, as long as it stays open, then the treatment of ointment is poured on and allowed to dry.
If it is healthy, so good.
If this is done, no other remedy can be found.
And if it is tried in, and does not pierce the foundation, which is either the base or the head, and cover the opening with a thick layer of char or soot, and you see the fistula coming out that shows the covering dust; If the head of the fistula, and it comes out before the tent, and then the cauterization afterward, as long as it reaches the tip of the tent. and will be delivered from the tent, and will cause pain.
Then the deformed ones that seem like a feather of a hummingbird, and there will be none left.
If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the flesh, whether by fire cauterization or medical boiling.
For the fire cautery, it assembles two things: it is to know, the surety of these deformed ones, and the stopping of blood and the treatment of moisture.
Then the treatment of soft tents in burrs or in the throat as long as it does not gutter, and it will be the deformed ones to enter the gutter.
Then treat the wound of the sulfurous ointment with dry heat, and the medicines are dry.
For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes suddenly from the depths, and it is moved away from the heart, if the wound is deep or shallow, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and it is the cloth or silk or charcoal, or it is near to being pierced, if not it had been only a way of hope and marriage, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize as we have said, or you cover it with a cloth and treat it as if it were the first;
and do not cause me too much trouble by cutting it, but cover the foundation with a cloth and let the excretions come out through the desired hole; Then the cure, as we have said.
Then the cure, as we have said. By chance, if it is healthy, you uncover the covering and sew it then when it is covered with foam, or by hand or with another appointed instrument. Then mold the wound that is in the wound, as you please. Then study to restore the wound and prolong the fistula in the part where the foundation is lacking.
Then study to restore the wound and prolong the fistula in the part where the foundation is lacking. If it is a more delicate thing for the patient.
And no time are fistulas in this manner: And when you tie the knot in the fistula, and it is or costs the foundation due to the lack of leather, if you take a knot at the head according to this form: And if you cut it in two, and thread the tent through all the filth in the fistula as much as it is at the head:
If it is present in the edge of the foundation, then pull out the thread of that pustule, so that you reach the bottom or the foundation.
and cut off the end of the thread, and assemble the two parts together, and pull them apart, and leave it for one or two days.
and do not restrain it ever, as long as the threads cling to the charms that are between two, and twist.
then treat the wound as soon as it is sore and healthy.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not work if it is too tight. For it is not recommended to make the fistula by tightening too much, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The form of the spiny thorn that was used to make the fistula is, if it is sharp and pointed, partly cut and trenched. And on the other hand, because one does not catch what one does not need to catch, as you can see here:
Error messages are according to two methods: Or they are denser at the foundation, like grains of resin, and they become smaller and larger, and with cutting they cause pain, and there are several or more, and they weaken the foundation and the head of the foundation.
But those that are weaker have little moisture, and they cut or a few lemon juice or a few wine, and they have the color of corruption.
And the treatment for those who have denser foundations is that you command the patient to spit out whatever he can into the chambers as much as possible until the foundations are weakened, and they will appear. If you catch it quickly, and you can hold it with your nails, or you keep it in your finger, then the copper takes its roots.
And if the uncinate cannot hold it by its moisture, then you can tie it to a string, or a cloth, or a piece of cambric. And extract them from your two hands, then wrap them, and powder with some warm powders that are in the fire cautery. Or if you cauterize them as it is said in the fire cautery, and treat them with other remedies until they are healthy.
And if the bones do not fit, then cauterize the patient with a clisterant, which is bitter and sharp when washed, so that it can be opened widely. The patient should not cut their hair, and if they do, they should be gentle with it.
The patient should not cut their hair, and if they do, they should be gentle with it. And if you cut your hair with scissors or tweezers, trim it, then treat it as we have advised, until it is healthy and does not fear the incision by fire. If you wish to mend the stitching according to this method:
If you wish to mend the stitching according to this method: Take a thread, cut it to length, and thread it through the needle, then pull it tight at the other end, and turn the two ends of the thread around the needle point, and if it is too wide.
and pulls the thread tight, then loosens the thread, removes the needle, and does the same for all the others, leaving only the excess blood.
then lays the foundation draped and smooth with oil or wax, and lays it down, and instructs the patient to rest.
and then leaves it until it heals, and when it is healed, if there are other treatments such as ointment and other treatments, then it will be healthy.
When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dis Many times there are knots in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. If you are ordered to return at the point of a spear or your nail, which does not allow it to dry. Then the doctor, as he can, so as it is necessary.
And if he cannot reduce it, then the dislocation becomes more severe than before, until it is painful and burned. Then the doctor, as he can.
The first sentence to translate is "dou Furuncle is a small appearance that should be removed from the body and goes away in front.
And never the wound does not heal, and it is felt as if it were dead, and comes throughout the body, and more with the hands than other parts.
And the doctor if you take a thorn from a goose quill, or a vulture's feather, and put that thorn on the wound, as it circumnavigates the wound totally around. Then turn your hand along all the chain as you catch all its trembling, and place it in front, and adjust the trembling of its roots.
And if you see, if I make this of a nail of iron or silver according to this form, and it is subtle and thin: Do not forget, but hold tight, and press with your hand.
And if you see, if the cauterization of the trembling is done, as it is in front or according to the chapter of cauterization.
No time has been made where a clasp of silver or an archaut, or a melted or hammered iron, has been made.
And no time has been made where these small and large bites are made, according to the ones that are stolen from them. Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small. The form of the fire clistery is small and large if it is made wide, or the belly is made in this way:
and if it has a deviation or the belly is lied, as you see, and the head is dislocated perceived.
and if it has an injury or one of the ribs is fractured, and the other is not.
and if it is in the belly or a vessel of beef or cheese is inserted, and all the wounds are seen through, and there must be a spice between each wound, then pour through these wounds a strong thread made of thread crooked in X or along the edge, and assemble the belly as if it were a hedgehog. and when the medicine is given, if the string is to the instrument before a strong thread, then close it.
And it is the form of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or ointment made of urine or something similar, then apply it lightly. Then the physician should mix it with his two hands as thoroughly as possible, until it is well mixed, then remove the clister, and gently lift the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine is visible, so be it. And if he sleeps all night, it will be more helpful.
2. And if you are dislocating due to disease of the abdomen, and the physician is hurrying to help, then it returns as soon as it is healthy.
And if the patient has an abscess or gangrene, if the clister is also very fine, as with the child.
And it is the form of a subtle clister that is formed when the skin is stretched:
We have said in the division of the cure of wounds;
or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the parts where they are made, and how they are made.
The things made by wounds are made by the point of the pierce, and the size of the tooth and the cuticle, or the lance, or the staff, or the spear, or similar things;
or what is made according to the wounds of the body, like a plague that is made on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simplest wounds, as the remembering comes in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or is born, and it is not broken, if it is caused by cutting or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubtlessly have an abscess forming: if the head is becoming safer of the wound itself if it comes out little blood from the wound, and it is healthier on the opposite side of the affected part:
And the patient avoids excessive consumption of wine and large pieces of meat.
And if he does not see better, if his meat is weak, and he does not drink wine, and does not eat cheese.
and puts the wound in oil, and if it comes out easily, it is washed with linen or rancid olive oil only, or with wine tincture.
And if he does not wash the wound with oil, and puts it on the wound, it is fresh at all its base, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say here afterwards.
And if he moves the wound, and puts it on any bandages, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large like that of a spearhead and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be assembled by tents, if they can be assembled by stitching, if I say as belly wounds, by sewing.
If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it can be held only with one hand, then it is a fracture. Then, treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness of the leather in the leg, and instruct the patient to eat large amounts of meat, such as testes and cooked frogs, as well as chicken, and similar things.
And if you cut or burn the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then it is a wound. If it is burned, let it cool down, and then treat it.
And if blood has gathered in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without surgery, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then the blood vessel should be cut. If you can stop the bleeding with a thread. If this does not benefit, then the cauterization is not useful.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then a light cure is sufficient. And do you put this powder on the wound that seems to have been burned.
And how the powder should be applied is. Take some tinder and a part of it. two parts of dragon's blood. three parts of chalcedony, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and extract as much as it adheres well and joins with all its sand.
Then she wells, and leaves it to drip, if it does not swell. For the medicine is not used until it is healthy.
And no time has it been done with just chalz, when one does not have incense or the dragon's blood, but that the arse has not moved the wound.
And if the wound is swollen, immediately in this way, if no other powder is used.
but put some digestive ointments, or wheat flour made into a paste with water and honey, until it is smooth. Then the treatment of other treatments as long as it is healthy.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if it is extracted with thin tweezers.
I will tell you about fractures of the little finger later.
of a minor wound
If the wound comes or goes and it is simple, but if there is no difference between the two and the collarbone or the artery is not affected.
If it is the case, if there is no other means than to let nature take its course and make no restrictions, because it harms the nerves and pulls them back. and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of such is with the brain, which is the more sensitive members.
but if the medicine is salted, like chalz washed in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and the wound washed again in gentle water, and other nails done this way, and moistened.
And if the wound is large, and the edges are not torn, then the cure as soon as it is healthy.
And if the wounds are clean and the hair is long and full of fleas, either at the bottom or lower on the leg.
And if the artery is closed, and the blood flows away, when it should not, and the limb is weak, and the cauterization is difficult;
And if the spine of the neck is closed, or the jaw, and the guide is kept, as long as the meat goes, if the bone is above the jawbone, and it is not touched but is returned according to its natural shape; And then the strain is applied, and it leaves some scars, then the treatment of wounds is discarded as soon as it is healthy;
And if the wound makes an impression on the bone, if you wish. If there are pieces of bone, if you carefully remove them, and those that you do not remove, if they remain long enough to cause the wound to fester and become inflamed, then leave them as they are.
And if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder I have mentioned. If he has bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then the treatment is as I have described in my chapter.
If it is a lance or a spear wound, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound's depth and consult the surgeon about the patient's condition. And scars are known to be fatal;
If it is not properly shaped and fresh at all its joints, if it is not put on at the first hour with powder, and it is not held by the sore that does not worsen, and returns to the body, and the patient feels better. However, if I apply an attractive ointment and it is tied twice a day.
And if there is no ointment, then put cotton in the wound for moisture and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there is no spasm, and the patient does not have muscle twitching or shaking from the waist. And when you see the proper arrangement, if you suspect that the wound is saved. Cure the wounds with tendons and other treatments as necessary to be healthy.
And if it cannot be healed, and you suspect that it has formed an abscess, then...
if the treatment is done as it should. And if the wound is of incision or contusion, and it is simple, or on the side, or at the back, if the treatment is done by the one who is in front; if it is large, of costure;
and if it is small, of powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and in pieces, if you want the wound to heal, and they are made to be if they are dissolved; If they do not heal, leave the wound exposed, and straighten the drawings.
And other wounds on other parts of the body are judged as we have said.
A sudden and severe pain in the stomach.
The dislocations of the stomach are large and numerous and small.
Of the large wound, no time does the intestine jump, or the intestines are torn, because of the insertion of others.
And the stitching is more painful, and never once is it better for the small wound than the large, because if one does not reinsert the intestines often, they are not reinserted in turns.
For this reason, the intestines swell so much that they feel pain, if they return more frequently, and for this reason it is difficult to heal the wound, for it is hard to realign the intestines in their place like others have done.
And you know that the rupture of the belly is in four ways:
The two common ones come in the belly wound, and the other wounds of the chest and the rest are common to other wounds.
And all of them are more clean with the belly wound, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no inflammation in the intestines, and it is a simple matter to reset, this is done by one of the two following ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are twisted due to the blow.
And when it is swollen, you should cleanse it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a damp cloth only, or you can use hot water and add vinegar and salt, and rinse the intestines as much as they are swollen.
And no time has it been made to fasten this wining, and it is dead that it does not hold.
And when you see the blossom leaving, if the intestine is hot or cold and uneven, for this is the cause of the passage being narrow.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the plague with the instrument and take out the hemorrhages.
The first treatment is dead that it is not big enough, for there is no need to cut it in such a great necessity.
And this is the cause of the stripping.
If a thorn penetrates the skin and is not removed, and it remains there for a long time, it may cause the following symptoms: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs out, if you put it back according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, because this is what is needed.
If the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen, it may be necessary for the patient to lie down on their back and raise their legs higher than their head. If the wound is located in the lower abdomen, it may be necessary for the patient to lie down on their back and raise their head and legs higher than their waist. The goal is to elevate the affected part above the other to reduce pain and swelling.
And it is necessary to manage these large and dirty wounds accordingly.
The wound is small as you see, then take your hand and administer the pitious that stains all the rawness of your hand, and gather your lips.
This is the common way to stitch, and you use a needle or more, according to the size of the wound's depth, then leave the end of the wound open and sew it with a thread as strong as it has; and pierce the two heads of the hide with the two heads of the sutures, which are loose from the hide, as long as you can pierce that part, and assemble the four ends of the sutures together;
Then the thread of a double needle passes through the eye of the second part, then assemble the two heads of the wound, and then leave out two spaces, and then pass another needle.
Then continue to pull the thread of the needle as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you are used to with needles, until all the wound is closed.
And the needles should be sharp and not too large, because sharp needles close all the wound, and very large ones cannot enter well. Therefore, they must be sharp.
and it is not necessary to thrust the nails too deeply into the flesh and hide, which do not close and cause the wound to protrude before the suture.
and then close the heads of the nails, so they do not cause swelling in the patient at night, and put on or drape cloth at the nail heads to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
and this method of stitching nails is more convenient in small wounds, because it does not cause an injury to the nail.
The second method is common, and it is that you sew together the two ends of the leather and the two ends of the thread with one nail or it has a strong thread.
When you have perceived these four conditions assembled, reset the wire at the part where you began, in the manner we have described.
and insert a splice between each stitch of a large thread of a minor doe.
This stitch saved the man, and I saw a wound that some had in their belly, which was caused by a cut, and it was a wound more than a palm of great size, and it had intestines several pales of great size, and it was the wound in the belly.
I opened the intestine and it had been there for 24 hours, and the wound was 15 years old, and I treated it and it became healthy.
And he saw that it would die, and it was a miracle.
and do not treat it with any remedy, as I am in the first stage where none is found and no medicine works. and put a piece of cloth soaked in wool over the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey as often as it is needed.
Or I would tell you two ways of dressing:
take the needle, and pull out the thread from the part that is most difficult to sew.
when it has reached the right side in the right direction, if you have pulled the needle or cut it or pulled out the thread, and then try to percerate another part of the part that is difficult to sew.
And if you understand this method, then follow the example of the barber who combs his beard, and leaves once with one part, and takes it back with another, until the hair is entirely combed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen himself describes, is such that no one does it otherwise, by naturally bringing together the two parts, and applying one part of the hair comb to the other, in this manner:
Choose a needle or haircomb that is appropriately sized, and carefully insert it into the flesh, and leave the two hair combs. Then turn the needle, and make sure it is firmly in place, and use the two hair combs.
Then I will feel the other side of the swollen part, in two other points located on the opposite side.
And this is the most common way to sew and stitch.
Galen says this, and no one testifies to it, so we must sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each.
And it must be sewn with one needle on one side and the other on the other side, in the same way as those who are sewing crooked.
And you should know that when the wound is in the belly, it is the stitching that is more painful than other belly stitches.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
And it is that when you touch the fresh wound with all its sand, if it has not moved, then it must be reset, and the intestine is turned, and it is good.
Then put on the powdered earth char, and if it has not moved, then put on any poultice that is present, as long as the wound bows. And tie the string, and be sure the shackle is tight, and the mirror. Then treat the wound as you would with others, as long as it is healthy.
When you have no medicine, if you put it, as much as it comes out of the belly, it gushes out like water, and it is moved twice a day until it is healthy.
For you have no other craft than this one to treat wounds, which are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound is not a principal limb, then it comes to milk the lighter in oil of calamus or rose oil, and put it on the edges, and dry them;
and if it feels pain or abscess in the wounds, and often comes, then the dressings should be changed with wine from Germany, and at the same time the abscess comes to the intestine;
And the percussion of the belly, and the scissors that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the veins that surround it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
And if the gum jumps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is swollen and turns black, then you must reset the dark one that has veins and arteries, because it has bones and blood.
Then pull what is between the ligaments and put the two heads down until it is loose to align the extraction as the gum jumps, and the wound bows.
Of the bursting of the belly
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored by a few men, because I have seen that some were healed from the belly or abdomen of a lance.
And the wound was on the left side of the stomach, and it became ulcerated and formed a fistula, and in it was the egestion and the vomiting.
I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop refining until it was healthy, and I saw the results.
And when I saw the improvement, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly. and there is no harm, but it delays in better conditions, and eats and drinks.
and no one knows that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be stitched in a certain way. First, pull the wound apart, then stitch the corners of the wound, and when the wound has been stretched out, put the lips on either side of the wound to hold it closed.
Then, the wound is closed, and it stays in place if it does not slip, then close the other end in the same way as before, until the wound is completely surrounded. And the wound is counted.
If the intestines are infected in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a very fine thread that is woven from the intestine of a beast, in the same way:
Take the end of this intestinal thread that is full of excrement, and then tie it to the end of this linen thread, then pass the thread through the needle, and count the intestine, and reset it in the dislocation;
And this way of stitching is not feared that according to the way of marriage and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, then it is subtle and not healthy, so it should be treated with care.
Of a fistula or if it is It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula," and also if they are thin and have a narrow opening.
And the fistula is according to the nodulation that must be hard and painful, where one feels pain, and it is as fine as the tail of a feather.
and never in a clear jump, and sometimes thick. and never small, and sometimes quite.
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that all wound that is not healed, and there is no pain, it is only due to one of the eight causes: This is to know, by the slight pain of the wound or corse; or for malicious intent; or because he has hardened his teeth and bites them, which he does not let go; or he has too much bite; or the thread is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region is delayed in digestion, and delayed in health, and escapes by nature; If there are wounds or bones:
and I have shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
The following lines are the translation of the given Old French text into English:
Wounds that fistula come in all members of the body. For it has fistulas that come from large wounds, arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, rectum, bladder, or any of the ribs, spine, or joints of the hands or feet. And if it comes to the part of the member that belongs to the proper owner, and they are similar to this.
And all fistulas of this kind are of unhealthy salvation, and only labor and ignorance.
And if there are no fistulas that do not come out of the body as I have said, and you are a doctor of the cure, and you see it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if you want; and if the fistula is straight, then do so.
And if the fistula is curved, then search for a fine tent of linen, because the threads will twist inside the curvature.
And if the fistula is forced and you do not find it well by tents, then search for it with the other pertus, because the moisture is short of one pertus and makes it clean.
Then, when you feel pain, know whether it is bone or flesh, and gently ask the patient to indicate where they feel the pain when you press with your hand, and the limb where they feel it.
And when you truly know the limb where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or any of the limbs I have mentioned, if the coupe follows what I have said, and oste be the fault and the corrupted parts that are denoted;
And then, when it is healthy, and the fistula is well sutured in the right place, if you cut in the same way, as far as you can, then you put fine tentacles in the medicine ague, and you thrust them into the bottom of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is excessively produced at the fons.
Then he puts antiseptic agents in clean hands as much as possible.
And if it is not clean, then he cauterizes as we have said, and if the wound is corrupted by the fistula, then the copper.
If veins or nerves do not cause pain or limbs, as we have said.
And if the wound is discovered and it has corrosion and blackness, as long as the corruption is all extensive, then the treatment of clean hands as we have said.
And if it is not clean, and the wound is deep, as we have said, ask what you are not able to do.
If dislocation occurs and you are able to do it, and remove all corruption, then restore the joint.
And if it is in good health, that is good. If not, then you should know that the corruption is too deep, and it will not improve. If there is no other engine but a lashing of nature.
And if it has small corruption and you remove it with thorn, if it is strained to the instrument that is suitable for this, and if it has more, if you remove them all, do not leave any.
And if the moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, then cope and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
If you do not clean the wound at once, then put on something to absorb moisture and leave it on until the pus comes out of the bones, and then if they become lighter, the bones will be easier.
If it is large bones, such as those of the thigh or knee, if you only clean it so long as the blackening is all over, then restore the wound.
If it has a large part of corrupting, and comes to the bone's end. If it is necessary to sew and cover all the corruption, and then treat it as much as possible.
And I will tell you of an example of a fistula that came to the leg of one man, if you pay attention and help in your work.
It was a young man who, at the age of XXX, had a pain in his leg for a reason that came from the chest, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he was fled by a large abscess, and there was no cause to open;
but they overwhelmed them so much that the abscess overflowed, and it corrupted the materials, and became a fistula, and there came out of it blood and pus from the belly and moisture from the chest;
And for the next two years, and no one had any skill in the art of hands, as long as I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to cure it, and what rotted due to the pustules of great heart; and became red in his youthful chest, and had a yellow color.
I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some went into another part of the leg.
I thought, and in one of the pustules I found a part of the bone, and I discovered it was rotten and hollow, and it came from the hollow of the bone;
I was he who appeared from the rotten bone, and I made sure there was no other corruption, for that was what I stayed for;
and began to restore the wound of the soda patient with long ties, and could not be closed.
and then I reopened it, and found the bone as before, and discovered that the infection continued in the bone, and dressed it, and then closed the wound. but I could not cut all the way through the bone, and it turned to one side, then I restored it with drugs. and it was healthy and closed quickly, and I no longer wished to open the wound because of the patient's weakness, which could not endure it, and for fear of death that I had caused him. For since the blood was often evacuated, but it was completely cured, and there was a hard char on the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or contradiction in any way, neither in the air nor coming out.
And if the bone is broken at any joint of the arm, then it should be set in this manner: Tie the cloth, and pull on the end of the bone that is open, and command it not to extend further up. Then tie another large loop on the second loop, and tie it around the bone that is sticking out, and make sure the end is in the correct position. Then draw the broken piece of the bone back into the socket, and cut off the excess, so that it does not break the bone.
Then put a sponge or a piece of cloth on the bone to cover the broken piece of the bone.
And it is necessary to soak as much as possible and can be seen and felt the corruption, and soak again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the environment or in a part of it, if the chest is completely opened.
Then put the bone in place, and then be of one part of another the corruption, and let the soaked part of the corruption be as long as the bone we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is closed, and it is the bone or it contains another part.
And if corruption is found in the continuation of the second joints, if there is no other cause but darkness.
And if corruption is found in the finger or toe, if it is not strong, but it is necessary that you investigate that corrosion, to see how it opens. And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but the vein or nerve will not oppose you.
And sharpen the scalpel and the threads according to the appearance of the bones, and their size, thickness, and width, and their hardness. For this reason, it appears to adjust to each appearance of its tool.
And you should be confident that the operation will show the instrument you will use, according to the knowledge of this art, and it testifies to the methods of diseases. If you lack the instrument you should have according to what is needed.
The head of the shoulder will become loosened either due to weakness or due to decay.
And when you have treated the corrosion by medicine, and it does not improve until the member reaches the shoulder or the corrosion comes, if the malady is caused by death or by malice, which is greater, by the defect of the member.
When the signs appear that the limb becomes black, if it seems to be from burning heat, and it turns red after turning black, then corrosion spreads throughout the member, and it takes hold of all parts.
If you feel burning pain, and it is due to the impact of some beasts' venom, like that of a sea scorpion and weasel, and the corrosion reaches the tip of the finger, then the cure is not to give in to the pain and come to help with your hand.
And if it comes to your hand, if the cure is given to the joint, then the corrosion does not come to the arm.
If it comes to the arm, if the wound is at the elbow.
If it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no way to save it but the quantity of its courage.
And so it is when the corrosion comes or pain. If it comes in the first joint, if the wound is after the other joint.
If it comes with pain, if the wound is all pain. If it goes up the leg, if the wound is at the knee joint.
If it comes from the thigh, if there is no other way but to kill the patient with pain.
The patient should gently bend the limb if it is not already bent, and then hold one end of the limb steady while another person holds the other end. This should be done until the bone is discovered between the two bones.
Then wrap the limb with cloth, and if it does not touch the healthy skin, then go to the physician for another injury and infection.
And if the blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the skin immediately, or if you put on any restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, then tie the affected member with a flexible cord, and treat it until it is healthy.
and I will tell you what happened to my home in short:
it happened to my home a darkness that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in the morning, consuming all the property.
and when we saw the corrosion, if it could be stopped from spreading, and it was saved.
and later, when it returned with the hand, and it came to me, and I did certain things after the disinfection of the corrosion, but it could not stop the corrosion.
and I say that I will hold his hand, and I do not hope to feel the matter. and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die because the strength of his arm was weak.
and he became desperate and returned to his land, and took hold of his hand and was cured.
and I have never heard of anything better than this, because it is the best way.
Never has an abscess come in the charnut, and it takes as long as it takes to gather many arrows. and then they pierce and break, and by jumping the arrows, and make them give way to the wound, just as some slaves. The patient's clothing that is cut is also as delicate as silk, and does not cut through the bone or nerve, and such disease is called "hernia", and is not called "fistula".
However, if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, it is called "fistula".
If the clothing that has been cut is entirely removed, and at the same time it is as delicate as silk, like some drapes. and should not be cut for fear of corruption.
And if you are engaged and the clothing is cut, and corruption is not at the front, and the hair is very thick, then the treatment of cleansing is necessary.
1. Pay attention to the size of the breasts, and the belly that is in it, since it is of a strong odor, therefore the clitoris is treated with Egyptian medicine that has been made: 1. Take asafetida, oil, and turmeric, in equal parts, and cook them in a pot over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes thicker than honey:
1. Then use this according to your need, and make it into an ointment and honey, and apply it to the breast, and draw out the pustule: 1. Leave the medicine on for two hours, then draw it out by squeezing:
I will make this many times, until the breasts are deformed and the pain is unbearable.
And never has it been clitoralised with ash, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you ignite grapevine ash, and the ash is poured, then it flows, and in clitoralisation, as long as you feel that the breast is well deformed.
And if the patient cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine does not cause ash, then clitoralise with ash and honey or if there is a little litharge in the mixture. If you choose to cleanse the wound with honey and wine mixture, where honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes it aerate the healthy.
And when you have done this, and you are sure that the wound is well cleaned, if the cleansing is done with what is most suitable for the case, and it is that you apply it as determined, and they do with rose oil and wine.
Or if you choose to cleanse the wound with some medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned the properties or treatment of the ointments.
And if the wound is small, and the cleansing does not enter, if it is enlarged from a piece of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is polished.
When the wound is too large, if it does not allow the needle and thread to enter, and if the purulent discharge is coming out of the opposite side, then the stitching will be insufficient, or it may be below the wound.
And if you do not cover the wound completely as you see, and it appears in such a way that the wound comes to the lowest part of the skin where it was, since when the wound is closed, if it does not allow the needle and thread to enter, and if you do not cover the wound completely as you see, and it appears in such a way that the wound comes to the lowest part of the skin where it was, then the stitching will be insufficient. That the bowel moves lightly and leaves nothing of the bowel.
That the bowel moves lightly and leaves nothing of the bowel. and take consolidating medicines to strengthen the stomach, and they are hung on the loose linen that covers the entire stomach. Then cope as forces to push the wound further into the side, because they are bandages soaked in the other linen according to the amount of wound, and they are placed over the wound of the stomach to align the bowel, and do not leave the large fold only after once more once.
And the one who is on the side of the wound often for the stomach, should often touch the bowel, and check what comes from the bowel, whether it is venom or too little, or digested, or undigested.
When the patient feels pain or knows it, and if it has gangrene or not, and when your medicine has been extended and you see its nature leaping from the wound, if it seems that the breasts have already settled, and approaches the health;
And then remove the morning or evening, and when you notice the wound, if it changes to another fold, and change the ointment;
And if the venoms are subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching.
For he has many horses that delay in making char for his wounds, and those who do the opposite;
And if he bows indigestibly after one day, if it seems that the breasts have not settled yet;
When the shoulders are delayed in setting, and they are reset, if the medicines are moist in substance and dry in virtue, then it is definite injury, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the underlying medicine.
If the injury is definite, and it is treated with rose oil, and the wine is equal in substance.
Then it is cooked and used.
And the same thing is made with honey that is cooked and increased when definite injuries are not present, or you take a knife and aloe and incense, and the broth, and the powder on the honey when it is near the fire.
Then they apply ointment and wrap it around the wound, and it is never administered by an astrologer for long, and roots of the celestial lily, which is also like fine flour and earth. And they use either simple or compound remedies: They boil them, and then powder them, and mix with the honey I mentioned, and use it.
And if the wound is large, and not cured by this treatment, then you should know that corruption has set in, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the joints. If the care of the fistula cure, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that often occurs due to the infection of the thumb or big toe, or by chance in other parts.
When it is inflamed, and it is not taken care of, if an abscess forms, and it runs and pours out blood until it reaches the root of the toe, and by chance it runs all the way;
and comes the corrosion to the bone, as soon as it comes with pain, and the head of the joint is large, and the color is changed.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you cover all the excess that is made from the finger, then cauterize the wound after. The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
And if the nail is pressed against the bone, and it begins to prickle, and bleed, then you should remove the part of the nail that points at the bone, and cut it off high up, and carefully and lightly apply fire-and-corrosion medicated ointments all over; Then the care of burns should be taken when it is healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, and it is removed, because as much as the bone corrupts and becomes, so it cannot be healed.
If you see the second knuckle corrupt, if the copper is in I of us as it was said before, then the cure once it is healthy.
If it is frozen, and stop, and it feels great pain, then it comes that you must first heal it.
Then cut the bone that is spatulate and hard in half, and make sure the cut does not reach the bone, for the patient will feel too much pain.
If it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
The dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is quite rare, and by chance it can be doubled, and never once it can be broken, and no one is born in the root of the jointure, or the birth is in any of us of the two.
Those who do not have any other pain in the second knuckle and do not move, and those who have pain in the joint of the second knuckle by chance move.
The size of the one who is tight so is light, in part manner: size it from its root a wide spatula.
He who finds in the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if you hold tight copper.
In the case where the head of the shoulder is dislocated from behind, if you can first cover the joint with a clean cloth, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healthy.
The causes that come are either from birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from similar things.
If they cover that the copper covers the soured, if it must be repaired according to their natural forms. Then put between two tent or draped softened in oil rose, that it does not sweat. Or you put between two pieces of cloth subtle, as it is sour, if it comes.
The patient comes to none of its two with the hand if it is not hot enough, as it should be.
Thick veins are heavily wrapped with excessive melancholic fullness, coming from more and more corpulent members.
And more often in the legs of those who go to church and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, you must never administer any purge of colic, and then the proper dose of the basilicon.
The iron cure is done in two ways: One way is to hammer, and draw out the black blood. And the other way is to tie the vein, and draw it all out.
The size is according to this method: First, the hot leg is raised with great force, until it is large and not subtle, then the other leg is tightly wrapped with the hair of the tail, from the part below the knee to the groin.
Then cut the vein at one point, either at the first, second, or third, of a large size, then take and draw out the dark blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as you can, as much as the patient's strength allows.
Then tie it off, and order that it be painted with black meat juice.
And continue the evacuation and cleaning as the veins become clear, and inform the patient.
The lesions of the affected area are treated in this manner: Shave the patient's leg, if it has hair, then put it in warm water, and make the leg red and swollen by applying heat to the veins.
If you do not have any bread, if the fire cautery is used, and then the cloth is placed in the vein at the long end of the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
Then apply the cloth to the gouge, and burn each part of the vein as it appears when touched;
and you will see red and black, and when it enters or leaves, it seems as though it is a thick string;
then cut the cloth below the knot, as soon as it is loosened from the cloth, and then place it in another part of the thigh, and then pull it out in three;
Then scorch the leather on the vein as much as it appears, then smooth it with the rasp, just as you have done, and it can be used for another incision, just as you have done first.
Then cut a larger size, or more than you are used to, then smooth it, and carve at the sharp edge, then trim and smooth the second size.
Then extract the larger size, as much as it will fit, then smooth it.
And if you cannot extract it, and if it sticks to the skin so much that it requires a needle of great force double, then cut it and trim it, and remove it from the wound, and turn your hand over and over, until it comes out. and keep it from being cut, for if it is cut, and it cannot be sewn or lifted, it harms the patient.
And when you have treated it all, put on the wound the fine hair of the plague with wine and rose oil. and keep it until it is healthy.
And if the wound is tight and twisted and assembled, and it is not straight, as we have said, then if you cut it roughly, but do not cut it straight, then it will be like we have said before.
The form of iron that is cut when the vein is cut, and it does not cut too much, so as not to cut the vein.
and it is a large spider's web, because if it were small, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is its form:
This vein is ensnared in limbs, in hot parts or no herbs or trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it naists another part than in limbs, and there comes a scurf that comes from the hide, as if the snake's belly comes out and turns, ensnared between hide and char;
When the signs of the beginning of this wound are visible if it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, and like a root of a plant.
When the head is opened, if you wrap it around a piece of plait from one and a half to two and a half inches long, and the noe, and leave the plait on the leg, and all times when it is not in its place, if you ensnare the plait and the noe;
And if it is too long, if a part of it is cut off, and it wraps around the remaining part, and does not cover its root as much as it has come out. If you cut it off, it will enter the chest, and bring forth pus and filth or blood, and serious illness.
For that reason, it is necessary that it be treated quickly and often, and nothing or a little remains of the head.
And there is no time for this vein when it is treated with your hands of one to ten, or more, and some have come to me, from which it was ten, and if you cut it, if blood comes out, and the wound is not closed, then everything will be lost.
And let the matter that is densified be seen, and apply the medicines to the skin without any food for one day, then the cure is done as with the abscesses.
And never have hands rain on this vein, and at the same time when it opens in the joint or the other, and then comes out with pain, and which drops rain;
Treat the wound as we have said before.
Of verses that are born between leather and skin This disease is called in our land "beef disease," because it often happens to cattle, and is a sharp pain that runs between the skin and the bone, and goes up and down the entire body, and is felt all over the limbs as long as the hide remains on the bone or is removed, and jumps;
And it is caused by excessive humor of certain substances, such as worms, snakes, and leeches, or intestines.
And one wonders about its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it enters the brain, by chance it comes out, and destroys the brain. And this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drawn out, if not possible when it will be.
If it comes to pass that you lie the leg down and out of a tight wound well, then pull up and cut it, and turn it in front in the chariot, and you do not sew it, if the cauterization by fire is done, as long as it burns;
And the greatest harm he can do, if he cuts the oil, as we have said.
And if you see him coming or approaching the oil, he will forcefully cut it off, then pull it out, and cut it off.
And it is necessary to use the physician's hands to dissolve the powders of liquid medicines for the human body, and to avoid eating fatty foods for nourishment.
Of the pain that comes from winding This disease is called "wakiri" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to no part of the body, but spreads from one part to another.
And I see what you have said. I was called to a female patient, and I saw her arm, and I saw a small pimple in the vein of her arm.
And afterwards, I saw it growing faster than anything, as if it were live silver when cut from the bone.
The pain left that bone, and it twisted in the shoulder, and then a little later, it curved throughout the body, until it came to the other arm.
Then she told me that it twisted in front of the body, just as I see.
I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease in this manner. Indeed, I wanted to make sure that she wanted to move the pain from one bone to another, but I could not do it, as I see in the woman.
I thought it was because the woman had loose hair, and the veins were exposed, and for that this restraint appeared necessary.
It did not occur to me that this reasoning was not applicable to those who have loose hair and veins returned.
When you see the cure of this disease, and the patient feels the pain, should it open as we have said, if the joint does not move much, and then cut as far as that restraint is necessary at the shoulder; and cauterize the shoulder.
And if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of this which causes the restraint is like pills, and pills of sassafras, and similar things;
The sails are various, depending on their appearances and the wounds of the body or they choke.
The diversity of its kind is that it has some with large points, and small ones, and hairs, and sores. and of those with double angles, and of those with long tongues, and of those where it has pieces.
and that which does not fit in any member, but fits in two ways. or if it has hairs in the principal member, like the head, liver, spleen, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. If it does not fit in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears, you will know. If it happens that you resist the extraction of this arrow, because the death comes after in many attempts. And when you see that it does not seem to be hurting, and the arrow is not hurting in front, then cut it off, and treat the wound.
And the sign of a fractured skull when the arrow pierces the bone is that it breaks and the head falls away, and the part where the skull was is dark, and there is scotomy and soreness and swelling and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of the cole. and by chance it lacks nose or ears; and by chance the word and voice are lacking; and a jump of the white moist wound resembling a frog's, and similarly like a horse's snort;
and this sign appears, if you hold the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in;
The sign of the arrow when it is pulled out or cut is that it is near the left cheek, and it feels as if it has been struck with a hard object, but not seen; and by chance the arrow is quiet like a frog's, and in dark red blood, and comes cold and very cold, and sinks: The patient does not doubt that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arm that is not moving is that there are no signs of inflammation from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the face turns pale, and he gasps for air and cries out in pain.
And if the arrowhead enters the shoulder blade, it may damage the small ribs. and causes great pain and suffocation. and they move all the limbs of the shoulder.
And if the dislocated shoulder is the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound, nothing indigestible of the meat.
And if the dislocated shoulder is the belly, and in a single jump through the small intestine, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead enters the bladder, and the urine is ejected in a sudden gush and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain. The wound is mortal.
The other limb, if the face, neck, shoulder, spine, shoulder blade, back, and muscles, and the limbs appearing similar, are only according to other dispositions. When the arrow is in the flesh or artery, and it is not exiting, as I will tell you if I can, because you are making such a face.
I have seen a man with an arrowhead that was shot into the shoulder bone. I tried to remove it, and from another side, I removed some fat from the ear, and it was not very painful.
And then to a game a arrow that fell in the grease of the olive oil soaked the paper soaked, and the arrow was replaced, and it could not reach but only to the tip towards the enemy, and it was the arrow very large like a Turkish bow, at all I made it light weight for the ears.
And if the patient is healthy, and no accidents happened.
And then to an arrow in the throat of a Crestian, and it was the Arabian arrow for the ears.
I knew the barbs, and very subtle when I passed it, and it was healthy for the Crestians.
And there was a wound on his shoulder, which was swollen or bloated, and he thought he would die.
and then if it did not change its position within XXX days, I dressed the wound, and stitched it, and the patient left, and there was no further complication.
And if a man has a wound on his shoulder or back, and the wound is infected,
and did not heal the wound, and did not maintain its natural position, and did not find any harm in any of its natural works.
And if another man has a wound on his face, and the wound is infected, It takes a long time to endure great pain.
and there are other similar cases.
And once a arrow was removed from the arm of a king's son, who had it stuck in his flesh and it was slanted to the left side. and the arrow was fully removed.
I was called for the treatment after it had been stuck for three days. If you find the wound to be very tight.
I tried to remove it with all my skill and did not feel any pain. and he felt a sharp and painful sensation in his left ear.
I thought it was the tip of the arrow that I touched with my tongue, because he did not swell. And I saw the lesion of the arrow.
And I saw the lesion of the arrow. I pressed the injured hand, and closed the wound on the right side, and it took a long time for the patient to feel the pain in his limb;
and he told me. I applied the medicine for the wound, which was overturned, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow that was embedded in the shoulder.
Then I closed the wound with the corrosive medicine, as the head of the arrow was visible to me.
And it takes well for the end to last for four months, and then it is exhausted if the wound that I have closed with nails is not healed by both sides, and cannot be cured.
Therefore, I did not stop refining and engineering ways of extraction, as soon as I took it with well-made nails, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, as I treat the wound.
And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. Therefore, I restored it, and it was sore from the wound, and the pain of the patient was relieved.
Or I said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your care to what I shall tell you, for the books cannot make everything look perfect.
But the skilled masters compere well with a few great things, and with what is present and lacking, true nine operations, and seven instruments, at the descent of things strained which come in this art.
I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are made flat according to two ways: or by the hand or they enter, or by another part;
and that which comes through the eye or it enters, is an arrow that enters into the flesh, and it has never been dislodged once.
And if it does not jump now, if it leaves it as is when the char is entirely burned and becomes unpleasant;
and if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot be removed if left alone for any length of time, and each joint must be moved;
and therefore it jumps, and if it does not jump now, if it is pierced through at all points, as long as the char is sharpened, and then it will be drawn out;
And if the arrowhead is returned to the shoulder, and if one cannot see it, if they wish for all of it. And if you feel it, if there is no instrument that can be removed.
And if you do not feel it because of the wound, and the arrowhead is not removed, if the patient suffers greatly when the wound is large.
When you cut the tendon, and if it has ears in the tendon, then if the bone that is marked with II part of the muse where you cut it, and then break or crush the ears of the tendon as much as you can.
And carefully, even if you do not break the tendon, you should pull it more gently.
And if you do not do it once, if the bone is still wet until it is read, then pull it out, because the extraction is painful. And if the dislocation comes out of place, and it does not return to its original position, then you should not do what we have said in this chapter for the cure.
And you should be warned of the incision on the nerve and the vein, and put in an emergency situation where you can cut the tendon safely, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently.
The patient should be placed in the form it was before the injury occurred, as this is the greatest help to him. And if you do not want to do this, then he will be placed according to the sign that shows you what to do.
The injury comes from another side, or the patient has not opened anything of his own, or the skin is swollen in some place that can be seen or felt.
The wound should be opened as much as possible so that the thorns can take hold, and then it should be extracted. If the pain is now intense.
If the bone is held in place, if the hand turns around as it enters the bone, until it expands the bone, then it should be pulled out.
And if it cannot be removed, then leave it alone and then continue the extraction as soon as it hurts again.
If the wound is from an arrow, it is cut open and cleaned; if it is not infected, it will heal. However, if there is doubt or fear, many die.
If the wound is deep, and you see instruments being administered, if the tip of the arrow enters the handle of the instrument, it should be removed immediately.
If the wound is further deepened, and the tip of the arrow enters the handle of the instrument, it should be removed immediately to alleviate the extraction.
If the arrowhead is lodged, then you must remove the entire shaft or the venom if it is still inside. Then, treat the wound as best as you can.
If the wound is in the chest, abdomen, or groin area, and it has healed, if it becomes inflamed, apply a poultice.
Et keep the vein and the nerve, then extract it, then close the wound, and make sure it's done properly. And treat it as soon as it is healthy.
The shape of the arrowhead's points used to treat wounds is similar to the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
And there are several ways to do it. Large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the wound.
The shape of the pointed hair is similar to that of an owl's beak, by inserting it at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown in this figure:
Veins that are healthy are XXXI, but if there are XVI, it means: Two bands that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herb" chambers. And the two arteries that appear in the two temples. and two wounds that are in the two eyes of the two hairs, which are called "aspirations and the wound that is in the forehead. and the wound that is at the top of the head. and the two girdles which are off. and the wounds that are in the lips of the mouth, which are called "angleworms". and the wounds that are below the tongue.
The wounds that are commonly known to be five in each arm.
One is the temporal wound, which is on the left side of the cheek, and it is called the "temporal wound" by the people. And the dislocation is called "fast" and is composed of the cranial and basilar parts, and they call it the "vein of the joint" in common language. And if the basilar part is on the west side, and they call it the "vein of the abdomen" in common language, and it is located under the muscle, and it is the one that opens manifestly into the pouch.
And the salvage vein is the one between the auricular and the anular vein, and if it rains.
And in the leg, there are three veins: One is the vein that is opposite the coronary artery and the pouch of the left side of the chest, and the second one is the vein that is at the ankle of the right side of the chest. and the vein called "cesna", which is on the other side of the ankle.
and in the other leg, there are three veins different from those.
The health of the veins that are behind the ears if helped by old catheters and removals.
And the quality of the veins that is, as I say, and it is that you rotate the head of the patient and rub the leg or the veins are of a rough fabric. Then the patient's neck becomes red, as long as the two veins are visible behind the ears in the two legs depending on the head. 1. "If you feel the knot tightening, and if you feel pain in your shoulder, then loosen it.
2. "Then take the scalpel, and cut through the vein as close to the bone as possible, then gently hold the vein with your hand all along it, and compress and squeeze the area until you see enough blood, then stop the bleeding as much as you can.
3. "Then hold the wound closed until it is healed.
4. "I have already said the incision and cauterization or first book.
5. "The health of the two arteries in the temples, if they are old and dry, and hard, and have become accustomed to the corse of the tears, then let them be removed.
and you judge its health if it is so as I say: And it is that the patient pulls on his chest, as long as the eyes open widely. and feels the pain in your belly, and then signs of distress.
Then gently press on the vein at the top of your belly, and remove the lancet, and gently press on the vein and the wound, as you have done in the other two veins, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need.
Then loosen the belt, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton. And then you form a poultice, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or beginning of this book.
The health of the forehead is as valuable as that of the head's cranium for ancient diseases of the face and migraines, and wounds.
And the quality is that the patient pulls his neck with force while the forehead is exposed. Then take the instrument called "forceps," whose form is:
And place the tip on the forehead, and hold it firmly with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see. Then the surgeon cuts the shoulder collarbone, and the vein is tied as soon as it is sound and never once with a wide flame.
However, it only requires the flame to be too hot. and the wound is safe because the bone is close, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
The safety of the two veins that are in the two arms is helpful for the wounds, and the tongue, and the gums, and the mouth, and diseases of the face.
and the quality of their safety if the patient suffers from pain when pulling his shoulder by twisting any limb, as before.
Then comes the correct way, and it is the straight path, a small gap, a wide one, for there is no char. And if the flame is subtle, by chance it may be broken.
Then make a clean cut, as much as you are able, and then sew it well.
The correct way of the vein is not always true, and can also be dangerous, and other diseases of the face, such as scarring and wounds that come with age, and especially when it is old.
And the quality of the wound if it is the patient's skin that is strained, then press the neck with your left hand, and take the subtle flame, and close the eye in the space between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now it will start to cut.
and do not alert too much, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need, then let it rest a night as it is most restored.
and this salve is useful for the relief of headaches, and at the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for eczema, and corrosions, and herpes, and boils:
and the quality of the salve is that if the patient pulls on his neck with both hands, as we have said;
and the master being above the patient's shoulder, and the patient being on his side, then draw out the vein widely, then cut it with a sharp knife, as much as possible according to your skill:
Then, I did another part in the other vein, then removed the ligature, and stretched the veins slightly, so that the patient's pain would not increase. and leave it until the wound is healed.
Of the health of the deer The health of the lips of the deer if they help to close in the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and cracks of the lips, and sores and throat.
And judge the health of the patient if it is necessary to tie the gauze in front of you, and stretch the neck as I have said. Then turn the cheek, and look at the veins, one of which is on the left cheek and the other on the right, and you can distinguish them by their color and because they are thin and dark-colored.
1. If you do not know how to do it, and you are in doubt, then try the largest one of each part, and make as many incisions as possible, because this is a different method.
Of the health of the tongue 2. If the tongue is injured after the head is treated, and it is at the throat, and there are diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth.
3. And if the patient is healthy, and the patient has fallen between your hands before the sun, and you touch the tongue, and look into each corner of a black vein.
1. If done correctly on both sides, and not too forcefully, as the arteries are small.
2. The veins that are usually cut are healthy in two ways:
3. either by pricking at every part of the flame, or by making a small cut, and are called "anethums"; 4. and are wide and thin according to the widening and constriction of the veins. The form of the burned face is such that it is not named, and it is wide as you see.
5. and has skill in opening flat veins with large clots of blood, and those that contain large clots and trouble. 6. and it is the form of the small arterial cut:
And it is more subtle applied, and it is safer for the subtle veins, or if there is subtle citrin sang in them.
The health of the basilican vein, which is one of these veins, if it helps with diseases that are deosy the throat, and the collar, and the belly, and the stomach;
and it is necessary for the patient to take advice and avoid the artery that is deosy. And if he presses the artery, and the blood comes out, then it is necessary to stop the pain, as I have said. and it should not be too many pricks of the flame, but trimmed as possible.
And if the basilican does not open clearly, then it is necessary to hold it and change another one. If you do not want any rain from it, or if you are healthy in the vein of the arm, take the bone out. It is open clearly. And the forceps at the fire, as we have said.
And if you see the bone of the limb, then it is necessary that you hold the arm and touch the bone as much as you can feel the pulsation. Then sign the bone and then hold the arm and cut the vein with a hot forceps. And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the bone enflame, because it is the artery. The patient must let the hair grow long and even for the fire cautery.
If you see coming out of the top like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, it is without arteries. Do not dislocate the shoulder, and hold your hand far away, then observe if it does not move unsteadily, which often happens. If you pull on the arm and let go, and do not move the patient's shoulder.
and hold it steady until it is safe.
If it does not become unstable, and you become weary, and the physician is not present, then if the artery is open, because the head of the shoulder will return. and it is painful for him.
And take a scalpel, and cut, and then take one of the halves and tie it well to the other side.
if it is painful for him, that is good. if not, if the remedy helps to alleviate the pain, as we have said, with powders that relieve pain.
and the pain relievers are not often used in other positions for the small part of the wound, and the relief of the arm.
The health of the vein in its environment is aided when it treats sanguineous pain and corporeal distress, because it is composed of basilica and cerebral, as we have said.
It is necessary for the healer to sew for the nerve that is cut, and if it is not too far, and it is closed, and it swells and the health becomes weak, and by chance it cannot be healed.
And this cut nerve opens many times, and if it does not open by any means, then it is necessary to sew with the old instrument. And you should examine the nerve in your power.
If there is blood flowing between the two veins, if it is long.
The healing of the head helps, which draws blood to the head and helps the limbs.
And it is necessary to heal by pricking with the olive or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all wounds, because it does not cut the nerve or the artery. 1. All ways, it is necessary to make the joint more flexible, and do not cause pain for the first time, and one resumes. 2. And by chance, some people find that their joints become more flexible, but it does not cause pain the first time.
The quality of health depends on your perception.
3. The first thing you should know for health, if it is healthy, is not to spoil it by keeping it in good condition and avoiding diseases coming.
4. And make the health in one of the three veins that are cut: 5. That is to say, cephalic, fasten, and basilic. And it should be healthier at the beginning of prayers, and in turn, and in yoga after mixing, when the sign of fullness appears.
And it should be healthier on the first day or the second, after two hours or three days.
The health that is maintained with diseases has no fixed duration, but when the patient is in bed or out of bed, in all hours and at all times.
And it is not necessary for the children to be healthier than fourteen years old, and for women who carry no more than a quarter of a month after the ninth month. Necessity does not apply to those who have passed 60 years of age.
And when some appear healthier, in whatever way that may be, if it comes to causing the intestines of a light child to become distended, if there is a lot of feces retained, then the veins do not have unnecessary intestines that are harmful to the principal members.
Neither is it healthy for a child who eats too much meat, nor for one who is drunk, as long as there are no hydropaths.
And if one becomes sicker after a passionate colic, vomiting, abdominal dislocation, and many women's menstruation, and labor pains, and waking and eating, and whatever strength, or by something of the arm or deep cord;
Then, subtly the humors, if it is not large, by meat and drink and medicines, you can do it if you have them.
Then, if you enter a bath, nothing will help, by subtly the humors, and you will become healthy from the vein until the third day, as we have said.
and keep you safe from work, pain, luxury, and such things.
and be united and joyful, and be healthier than what we heal, and rub the arm two or three times, then stretch the ligament in a straight line because if it is too tight or short, you cannot correct it without;
Then the physician examines the patient's arm with their hands, as long as the veins throb, and they feel it.
Then the physician moistens the cleaner with a little oil, then places her left hand on the vein of the patient's arm, as far as she can reach, so that the vein does not bleed. The vein does not hurt.
For there are veins that feel like cords to the physician, and if they are so tight, then they are easily compressed by pressure, so that when one places the cleaner at the vein, it retreats from the vein and cannot be opened, and then it is this one. If the vein is pricked, and the wound is too tight, for it is necessary that the surgeon be informed in these matters.
And if the vein is pricked for the first time, it's nothing. If not, then after a short while, if the shoulder does not return to its original position, it is twisted.
If the shoulder is twisted, and the patient becomes unconscious, leave it alone for one or two hours, and do not tighten the arm. by chance, and gangrene attacks the member.
and do not enter water, then return to health if it pleases you.
When the wound is small, or if it is not cut subtly and you doubt that it does not have much blood, then you fear that there is not as much blood in that wound as you see, so proud in that wound itself to all the flame fairly.
And the patient's strength is slight, unless it is deformed. For this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the wound swelling, if you do not renew the cleanliness, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the skin of the blood, and it is dried in this wound the oil that is on it;
And then apply oil to each clean wound that you clean the veins, to reinforce the course of blood.
And the same treatment is used for bowels and guts when it is placed on the leg; If the skin is not removed and spreads when it is too thick.
And if there are many abscesses that come often, as soon as it is only healthy when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put a damp sponge on the wound, and tighten for an hour;
It is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it does not move at the shoulder after any time without darkness or discoloration, unless it is known otherwise. And if you see, do not put any aloe or re- inserted in the juice of aloe, mustard, or like.
And often there is postmortem and appearance at the health of the basilica.
And then place your hand on it, and if it is not appearing well with the compression of the hand, it is. I advise you that you do not put anything of this that we have said, for by chance without the artery.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And treat each sore according to its quantity of virtue and color of the sore.
If the wound is bleeding, then leave it to bleed until it turns red. And if you see large blood clots, then let them be until they become small. And if it is too cold, then leave it to cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are in pain and fear, to have the skill of extracting blood. Then make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it will be healthier and more often, and they should be treated by cutting across, without touching;
And this method of healing is saved from the collapse of blood and the weakness of the nerve, and it is worth noting that the longer the joint is, the wider it is.
And for those whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give thin bread in the juice of green apples. If it is scorched, if the blood is drawn three or four times, or if it has a cold complexion, if the bread is mixed with thin juice before the healing, or with honey syrup or aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, nutmeg, ginger, and cloves, and well-odored honey.
If the patient feels ill after the evacuation of blood, if it is wet and has a pungent odor, and if other things are used as we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of blood.
If he sees his arm swell and become healthier again, if it happens, when he is deprived of sufficient health, so that he becomes healthy little by little, according to the amount of his virtue that continues.
If he sees his arm swell after the first health, and if he is strong, if he becomes healthy within seven hours after the first health, or after the next hour.
And if one appears healthier on another part, then it must be healthier the next day or the following.
For it has an excess of blood from the body that is already tired, and brings on fever. If it comes to draw out a large amount of blood, and clean the wound as much as possible. Then, since you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the wound as soon as it is healthy, so that the death does not occur in the wound of pus, and this often happens when the healthier ones are neglected.
And you do not have to wait when you see the arm ooze blood, and make it bleed again, and the wound is closed, so that you press on it. If it is not broken, extend the arm gently, for it would be harmful.
But let it remain for the second time. Or you do not point the fire at the tip of the flame, as it will freeze at the vein's exit and then place it back in boiling water, and gently press it.
And if the vein is inflamed, if it is left without being tightened and not stretched as much as possible until the abscess is relieved.
And if it is necessary to draw the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed of the bone.
And the way to make it clean if the patient burns his hand in hot water, as long as the color is red.
Then tie it loosely, if the vein appears well, then the wound is now through, do not make it too wide or too long.
And let the wounds be wide, and be well close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out until you have enough.
And if this is not possible, then put the hand in hot water, as it will be more in verve than in this state.
The health of this wound is better than all others, as it has neither artery nor nerve.
The health of the saved hand of the right hand is better than all diseases of the stomach, and it is this way.
1. To hold back the hand, and cut with a hot iron, as long as the vein is bare, if it can be reached. 2. And if it is not cut straight, and you cover it completely, if it does not hurt at all.
3. And do not force it too far, because the flesh is all raw and cold, and then put the hand back on the hot iron, if the wound does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be moved.
And when you have treated enough blood as your skill allows, if you put the vein oil and seal it firmly, and then make a knot for each rain.
The patient's hand that holds the remedy is most suitable for treating mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said for the other hand.
The remedy of the soap is suitable for all diseases that are unpleasant to the body, such as diseases of the lungs, retention of fluids, and disease of the legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
4. And if the quality of his health is such that he cuts with hot iron and frets the vein as it becomes bare, and then cleans the joint affected by pain. And if the vein is at the ankle, and due to pressure from the foot it starts to swell.
If the swelling is small or large at the ankle, it is not good.
And if you have swelling at the foot, if there are nerves that are exposed, and it is painful to walk, as it is to cross a bridge.
and let the old veins be severed.
And if you cannot have children from your beloved spouse, and the wife is pregnant again, and the wound of the vein is well-healed; then leave the vein alone.
And if the swelling returns for the second time, if it is only a small amount, because the foot is salty.
Do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and I will make a poultice of the other foot in the same way.
The first line of the translated text is: "The pain in the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its cure is in the relief of the toothache, when it is due to blood evacuation.
And judge the quality of his health if he is in cold or bath, and draws out of the ankle IV when twisting, because otherwise it will not open the vein.
And if it is opened, whether the patient is healthy in all ways that you can think of, and through. And it is worth copying if the patient understands it, as it is written, and it is returned to the hands of men.
And it is worth copying if the patient understands it, as it is written, and it is returned to the hands of men. And if you do not copy, whether the patient is healthy in no way that has been opened or done, and to the small door, and it will give you some nerves.
And make as much evacuation of blood as you see, and then release the limb, and put on cotton and tighten. The patient is now healed.
Suction devices are made of horn, or iron, or glass.
And suction is performed in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
And this suction, which is made by cutting, is done in two ways: either it is totally burned, or by fire.
And this suction, which is made by cutting and extracting blood, is done in twelve hours of the day, with some being all the same, while others are different. And the other is removed from the neck. and two more in the other shoulder; and the suture of the corner; and the suture of the two shoulder blades; and the suture of the knees; and the sutures of the elbows; and the sutures of the legs; and the sutures of the ankles;
and the suture does not touch any vein, only thin wounds that are scattered throughout the chest, and therefore it is not able to cause harm, as we do with a wound; and it is necessary that it be maintained, neither too much nor too little fire, in no disease that comes from excess, as long as the heart remains whole;
And if necessity of diseases comes to visit, or by habit, if the midwife visits each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and also in every ten;
For there are those who, when they have to visit, have heavy burdens;
And if there are those who, when they come to visit, have fullness and inflammation in their face, in their cheeks, and in their neck, and pain in their limbs;
And those who come to visit with a fever in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit blood; If they have such wounds that prick, and see blood and pus and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and also when it is mid-month, we order them to rest after three hours of the day.
The health of the patient is aided by the girth of the belt... that comes as it does to the wounds, and it can only be after the evacuation of all the blood.
and this ventilation is in the head of the patient's health, and it can only be when it is used for a cold complexion or if it has charcoal, because this does great harm.
and that's why the physician only uses it when he has cold diseases of the head.
And those who often become ill, then become obligated, and therefore it is necessary to shorten the rest period due to the fear of obedience.
The first line of the text translates to: "The ventilation of the chest is in the neck of the healthy cord and for this reason it is in the relief of the bronchial cough, and also for the fever and the sore throat, and for all the inflammations.
The second line translates to: "And it is recommended to bind it tightly, because if it is too tight, it can cause discomfort in the stomach or abdomen.
The third line translates to: "The ventilation of the collarbone is in the neck of the healthy spine and for this reason it is in the relief of the headache, and also for the toothache and strangulation, and for the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the neck of the healthy spine.
and it is necessary that you command the surgeon to express his hand when putting it, so as not to cut the artery, and to avoid further damage to the wound.
The windings of the gums do not reach the disease of the mouth, and the corruption of the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and is in the lips of the dry lips.
The cold and wetness of the shoulder joint causes inflammation and swelling, which can lead to serious health problems if not treated immediately. The affected area must be treated promptly to prevent further complications.
The windings of the cheeks are as much as three fingers of the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins.
and command the surgeon not to cut too much in front, because the patient's face is naked and does not know how to cut nerves and arteries.
The suction that is used at the groin if it causes pain and other diseases, and it is necessary that the suction be large and deep, with a stone-like texture, capable of properly drawing. and by chance, if it is too fine, it may break. and it causes great wounds.
The suctions on the legs are healthy and open, as they draw blood from all parts of the body, and relieve old pains of the thighs, uterus, bladder, and vulva, and draw out the hairs.
and are on the thighs of the second feet, and the calves, and they all make the body weaker after long use, and cause pain in more positions.
1. The manner of inserting the vacuum is to first empty it, and then place it firmly, and move it evenly, and continue doing this until you see the red and swollen part, and the appearance of pus.
2. Then, clean them, and put the vacuums back in their place, as some have such severe pain and difficulty: 3. If it is necessary to cut once only, and make wide wounds, and a proper size: 4. and gently suck:
5. And if it is not big, and they cut twice: The first time to subtly cut the vein of great blood.
And if it is not very fast, then it is likely to injure the third time.
And when we try to draw out little blood at a time, we only succeed once. And if we try to draw out much blood, we often return.
And if it is not very fast, then it is better to stop and finish it if the patient's pulse is clearly felt, and those who have thick skin and are durable, and those who have rough edges, you should apply the ointment of opening and dissolving oils from the ointment of the oil openers. If it is made from olive oil, or honey-sweet almond oil, or sunflower seed oil.
And if it is made from vegetable oil, such as mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar oil.
And if the excess is large and cold, then take olive oil, or balsam of Hermas, or olive oil of anise, and similar things.
And if the skin is healthy and has large pores, it should not be oiled, but it should be washed after the application of vinegar of rose, or cold vinegar, or mushroom vinegar, or vinegar of porcelain, or other similar substances.
And those who have moisture in their mouth, if they rise from silk, or vinegar of mustard, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive superfluities rise from wine vinegar, or ague of seuc, or decoction of anet or chamomile, or other similar things.
And it is not recommended to vinegar before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
For do not sleep after ventilation, and it is necessary that it wakes up when it should ventilate and when it is ventilated.
And if the healthy one is cold, and the unhealthy one is too hot and inflamed. If it comes that he eats cold things, like lettuce and endive and spinach in milk, and similar things. and consume puddings, and hot cheese, and moist meats.
and consume puddings, and hot cheese, and moist meats. And if the one with a cold complexion eats honey syrup, and aromatic wine that is between winter and spring, and consumes little, and consumes puddings and thin soups and pies.
When the joint is dislocated, if it needs to move more than a finger's width, it must be reset.
It is necessary to give certain people one time of triaicle or muscate before the dislocation, or afterward, to comfort the main limbs. It is necessary to be subtle with the joint, but only those who are able to bear the pain should be dislocated.
The vents that are felt to be painful are those that are placed on the stomach, and on the thighs, and gout, and on the abdomen, and the bowels, and the rains, and the hainche, because this member does not suffer from pain in other parts, and only when it is attracting pain from one part to another, as we do with our breasts when they are sick.
For the viscosity that is in the member, if we suck out the abdomen and the belly with cups to relieve the member.
And reduce the pain when it is inflamed or pierced, if by its virtue it attracts the inflammation, or if it leaves the pierce of the member.
And this is done when it is hung up in the belly and the mouth when it has inflammation retained, and these cups are administered empty by sucking only. And no time are they administered together with fire, and no time are they plained with cold tea, as in many diseases that cause the eyes to water, and in this way we fill the cup with hot water, or with water that has been boiled herbs, which are edible.
The form of the vacuum device administered by fire is:
And it has two large and half palm-sized poles, and it has either cost as much as a thousand pennies, or less if the patient is small; so that it can be inserted like a needle, and it is made of steel, smooth in front so that it does not cut the helper's hand when putting it on the member.
and in the environment, a wire of cross-grain steel or iron, to be held by a chisel, and it is large and small according to the diseases and the pain of those who take them.
For the bellies of children are not like knives, nor thin as fat.
And it must be placed on this ventouse on the member:
The cauterization candle or ointment should be applied, and it should be placed on the ventouse through the hole that is on the ventouse, so that the fire does not reach the inside of the ventouse and burn the patient.
And then it should be placed on the member, and you must see if the wound is as we have said, so that if you see vapor coming out, and then remove the ventouse.
And apply the ointment as before, and repeat it often, if you have the skill.
In the ventouse that is in the patient with the disease of pleurisy, at any age, there is no hole or wound, and it is not infected unless it is only when it is clear of fever and is placed on the member only.
1. "And it is the form:
Without being stretched, they are not broken except in the limbs where it is not possible to put a ventouse due to their small size, like the lips and genitals, and similar ones. and in them of cartilage, if like two or three, and other similarities.
and the quality of the user if it is that when you find dislocations that are in soft waters and have a clear sensation of movement, then take them.
and put them in soft water as they are related, and have no belly. and then clean the vein and the wound, then rub the limb as much as it is red, and put on the dislocations.
When they are flat, smooth, and well-placed, if it is the shoulder or arm that can be splinted, it is placed there, as this is best.
If not, then lift the shoulder, and then the elbow, well, and then straighten it.
If it is too late in the case of cold wrists, if the linen is too wet, then spread it out on a cool surface, and leave it until the wrists are not swollen.
If the swelling increases, then put on vinegar or hot irons, and similar things, as long as it is not too much.
If you cut half of the fevered limbs, and leave them as they are until they cool down on the limb, it will now be still.
And if you have more of them, take others that are fresher.
And if the wounds do not take the cloths, take the flesh of the limb freshly cut, or thrust a needle into it as much as it pains, and then insert them, and as they feel the warmth, they will cool down.
And when you see them bleeding, if you powder some aloe and silk, or some charcoal, they will stop bleeding now.
Here begins the book of wounds. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it treats of wounds and dislocations.
1. "If you are seeking knowledge about this chapter, it is not found in any ancient books, nor does any letter contain it.
2. "And for this reason, the science is lacking in our land, as I have never found any book.
3. "And I do not know anything about it, because through the science of ancient books, I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by my habit in life.
4. "And I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the stumps that are amputated, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say this is the introduction of this book, the words and chapters, and the patient understands them, and learns the truth, if those who have experienced it can teach and learn this noble art, and teach others.
I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or twisting comes to any part of the body, if you hurry to heal the patient's shoulder from both sides, nothing will fail, as weak as it may be, whether from cold, children, or wounds. unless you tighten it not very tightly, or too loosely.
and do not use cold things, such as ice and hazelnut, and do not drink wine, nor use thin charcoal, and do not fill the veins with blood too much when you have no doubt of gangrene or expansion of matter in the limb.
If the patient reviews the treatment they used at their first government.
When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the meat that causes great swelling, or if there is viscosity, like wheat cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made of wool, and cheese, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things. For the swelling that is recovered, the fracture gets worse and sooner.
And you know that bones and joints broken cannot be well repaired or mended according to their nature due to the lack of members, nor those that are too soft, such as small children.
but there is no cure, reset the broken bone and large tendons that are pulled and joined together as much as possible, just as it was before. and not to leave the work undone, and for this reason it is recommended to avoid large meals, as we have said.
The treatises of the physicians declare that there are many ways to break bones.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or leg, and I will tell you all the ways of fracturing in this chapter. For there is a fracture that occurs when falling, and another when struck, like the size of a quill to write.
For there is a fracture that occurs when falling, and another when struck, like the size of a quill to write. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a small crack.
And to have his engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes to his memory in his head.
and it is known as the fracture of the bone because the bone is twisted, and it is well-apertured by itself, and some by pressure of the hand.
and when it does not have knots and is at the tip, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it may have knots, or a cut, or a small fracture. If you can only move it with your hand, but put the medicine that comes after, and then pull it gently now.
And you suspect that the fracture will be in the joint, and the two parts are dislocated, then you must now correctly align them, unless they cause death.
and if they are spasmed and come, then leave it alone as long as the spasm is calmed.
Then place it evenly in the muscle that you can lightly and wisely, and soothe that the restoration of it is lighter than the restorations of cells or if there are pieces.
Then pull it, as it should be after this.
And if it is in the bone with broken pieces, if you stretch it by two parts, it is hands or fingers, or at your hand it is some small members, or at the cords, or at one cord and at your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, if by the parts of the broken member they are out of place, then reset them by using your fingers in the muscle that you can, and keep in mind that by your own hand does not come to the patient's pain or injury.
And carefully adjust the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
If it feels good in your hand, even if it seems not to be well.
If it grows well, and does not strain too much, do not press as they do who come by their incision and contraction to the member, as we have often wanted.
And when the member is in its place, if the surgeon handles it well so that it does not move, neither by day nor by night, nor turning, nor in any other way. And make sure that the member is well secured so that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not so, and it is necessary to put him in part of the body that does not feel any pain.
And make sure that the member is well secured so that it does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not so, and it is necessary to put him in part of the body that does not feel any pain. and keep him in place, so that twists do not come when he returns to it.
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I say.
I advise that the broken member is various in smallness and in size and in shape.
For he has many limbs, which are divided and treated in the same way: if it is necessary to wrap them with linen cloths and fine threads. and those that are large, like how a knee is treated.
if it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard linen, because the large bandages cover all the limbs, and they are tightened evenly, so that there is no swelling.
Then lie the entor is lightly bound with three or four turns, according to the member, and your hand is held tightly along the entire line, then go to the end of the fracture and it is tightened less than the fracture, which the fracture slightly moves away from the fracture;
and soften the member a little and a little, as you grip a large part of the healthy shoulder, then take another line, and turn the entor upright on the broken member;
then return to the part opposite the fracture, and tighten it gently, do not pull too hard or too loosely, as we have said in the first line of this chapter;
Then place the threads between the stitches of linen or drapes, as they are equal, then tie them with silk and braid, and then put your well-made ends on, if there is no hemorrhage or swelling.
And if there is swelling or hemorrhage, then put on something soothing for the hemorrhage and stopping the swelling, and leave it alone for a few days.
Then tighten your ends, and they should be of about one-third of a wide, sharp knife, or of wheat, or of dates, and they should be like this figure:
But it is necessary that the one who sets the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others.
and also be of the same length as it is required for the member, whether small or large. Then tighten the bandage as you did in the first attempt, then tie a thread around it, as you did in the first attempt. The more tightly it is wrapped, the less it is.
And it is necessary that the thread be smooth, not too thick or too thin, and be of linen thread.
Because if the thread is too thick, it is like the work of the fingers who make the laces of linen threads, and it is a great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it only needs that there is less space between each stitch than the thickness of the lace.
And if the patient is cut by the sharp edges of the stones after being washed with water, if they are not covered with linen or cloth, so that they do not freeze.
When the wound is with the tweezers, and the hair is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this after.
And you should not try to pull out all the broken bones at once, as it is dangerous. For when the members are large, it is not recommended to use these tools that are later than V years or VII, or according to the strength of your aposteme.
and then the manner of ancient splints to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
and is that you take flour that is found in the mill's walls, mix it with a large amount of water, and make this concoction, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method for restoring fractures in other positions, as well as for women and children, because it is neither too wet nor too dry.
Another way to mend fractures, dislocations, and twists: Prepare a mixture of oak bark, linen, and animal glue, mixed with Arabic gum, and add water in the ratio of 1:10. Mash and aloe, in the ratio of 1:2. Add alochil in the amount of 78%. And make a powder, and mix with egg whites. If the complexion of the face is hot, then use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial for many men.
Other ways of measuring than by twist: take a measure and a caliper, at least 10 centimeters; mark and incise, at least 7 centimeters; according to the size of the patient's hand; mix with arsenic X, and cook well, and add water or urine of the patient, and administer;
Other ways of measuring joints and bones of the limbs, and alleviate pain, and the size is according to the bone, and fracture: take new cloth, and the oil in alcohol and cooked, and put on the limb;
These plasters do not restore flesh, but it is necessary to soothe the post-surgical pain and the true bone pains.
Another method of splinting that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earth oak leaves, and mix them together, and make a poultice.
Another way to make plasters for the repair of bone fractures and to help with the recovery of post-surgical pain. Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, and a portion of flour from each.
and mix with wine, and apply to the affected parts, and moisten with rose water or vinegar, and use.
2. Another way to apply it more frequently than the first, when the wound is firm, comes to the restoration of the limb. Take the roots of valerian, linen seeds, mustard, honey, and a portion of each flower: violets and chamomile. and mix with salt water or sweet vinegar, or with wine, according to the condition of the member and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that it is not recommended to apply anything on the broken bone to restore its strength, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too wet nor too hard.
It seems that Galen suggests that on the broken bone to restore, one should apply things like dry and warm substances such as mustard and aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Other ways to mark injury and pain: Take fingers and toes of the opposite hand, or hairs of the head, and nails, and cut them evenly, and the skin, and then make a mark.
And then leave a small part afterwards, and take care not to hurt the patient's shoulder; if it does not move, do not move the bones of the shoulder. if not left by hands. And if pain comes to the shoulder, or itching, tenderness, or swelling, if you have time, and leave it, and then make the mark now.
And gently unwrap it, and wet the mercury sponge, and dip it in cold water, and lift the leg up as much as the itch stops, and soothe the pain. Then let the leg rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moisten it with cold water or olive oil, and tie it tightly, as long as you are sure of not having a pulse.
And reduce the inflammation of the leg, and soothe the pain, then resume gently wrapping it, and a little bit of ointment, and do not strain it too much like before. And gently as it is healthy.
And if you see that the wound is gushed with blood and there is pain and swelling, and it is inflamed all over, and you have skill in plastering and bandaging, if it recurs, as you did at first properly.
And if nothing comes to the limb that we have said, if it does not slip after three days or four or seven or ten. and never more than twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the fracture sets, and approaches the bone to the splint.
However, more restraint than before, and it will increase its flesh, as I have said before.
and if you see the limb drying more than it should, advises that no herbs can come. When the fever rises, it often happens that you lose consciousness, and this happens every time, regardless of the type of day, and it lasts for a short while.
Due to this fever, the muscles in the limb are often injured, and they become weak, causing the member to be misaligned.
It is harmful, and if it becomes more severe, I can only provide pain relief and advise proper treatment.
There are many types of wounds, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
For there are wounds that are caused by the impact of a spear, and the skin covers the entire bone, which is broken off from the bone, just like a hawk or a falcon. For this reason, this method of fracture is called "hammering.
The spear pierces the bone through various senses and is called this method of fracture "absolute.
And these are the wounds of these two great or small fractures.
And if it is a thrust embedded, or cut, or from the bone after the piercing, or from the other side of the piercing, or other similar things.
If there is a persistent fracture, which draws the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is under the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is healed in the bone as subtle as some chisels, and it is a small fissure, and for this it is called this fracture "capillary.
And if the wound is made by cutting with a blade, or piercing with an awl, or seeming something else, and it lets the piece of bone enter, and it is the same as when they cut with hot iron when they forge the hammers; If it enters the piercing.
And furthermore, those who have been washed with wet water, like that of a child;
and come in all these ways of fracture that are lightly broken if they were, so do these; and I will speak to it in his shoulder;
And let us consider all ways of fractures by the methods used for them, and by the corrupt char that is used.
The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one has discovered the bone, and froths with their hand, if the dark fracture is open.
In the treatment of the fracture, keep in mind as many accidents as possible of the midwife, and if you see no such accident, then like vomiting of cold, admission of understanding, extension, flexion, congestion, fever, and the wounds turning red and swelling, and other symptoms in various dispositions, if it cannot be cured with doubt.
If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
When the first pain comes to you, and it is in the shoulder, then it is necessary to stop the movement of the bone before the fourth month at the muse.
If this is the case, and you stop the movement of the bone before the ninth month, then the tendon of the bone will be corrupted, and the accident we have mentioned will come.
And if the bone fracture comes near the girdle that encloses the collarbone, then you must cut off the damaged part;
And if you ignor the patient's pain and cut off the wet skin, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and reveal the wound more severe than you see, and if pus comes to cleanse the bone, or abscess ruptures, and you help it with what comes, and if you fill the shoulder with oiled flax; 1. And make the wound rest as long as the inflammation is eased and it is assured of not dislocating. 2. Then the bone begins to ossify, and it is made according to two methods of burning:
3. One method is when you cut at the narrow end before, and it forms:
Then, cut another piece of the same size as the first one.
4. And the second method is when you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron:
5. And in working lightly, so as not to blunt the blade:
And if the bone is hard and thick, then it comes to pass that you percuss it with your hand, otherwise, if you maintain the edges with tapers, do not exceed the point of the bone, and it must have a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to pass over the bone.
and you must have more of them if many people come to their joints in the end of the bone, if you have tapers for your test.
And this is the form of the three ways of tapers:
The quality of percussing outside the broken bone is that you put the taper on the bone and turn it as much as necessary until you feel that the bone is perceived.
Then, move the burn to another part a short while later, and then do everything thoroughly, then make the cuts into the bone that is between the holes, and do it more subtly than you please, and lightly, as we have said, as long as you take the bone out of your hand, or from any of the stirrups that you have, like nails, pincers.
and make sure you do not touch the brain or the sweat.
And when you have the bone perceived and cut, if it comes that you cover the wound that is made in the bone with the other instrument as an incisor, but it should be more narrow and more subtle than the other incision.
If there is no movement of the small bones, neither heavy nor light scales, if the lighter bones slightly move. Then, treat the wounds and injuries that we have mentioned.
And another way of opening is when it is more difficult, which is the Galenic method. And the knife is very sharp, and that is its word. It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the open fracture is visible, so that when you have removed this part, if you measure from the top of this incision, the form is:
And does not cut too much on one side, and the other part is turned towards the bone, if it is being cut.
Then, with a small cut, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and be careful not to hit the cloth that is soaked.
If it is at the bone, if it is lightly on the bone, for it is felt quite painfully, and causes great fear.
When the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only crushed by itself, and it has small pieces, if they cover the rough edges, and smooth the scales with a subtle rasping tool that you must have various quantities of, to adjust each joint according to the degree and shape of the fracture.
If you shave in front of a coarse rasping tool, and then use a more subtle one, and continue doing this as much as it is well.
In each of the other hair removal techniques and subtle wounds, it is necessary to follow their directions according to your needs.
It is a matter that cannot be answered by anyone who has studied in this art.
And if the scar is discovered, then it is necessary to apply flax to the wound according to its size, and grease with rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another doubled gauze, and grease it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first gauze. And do this more gently than you can, so as not to burn the skin, then apply with other means and do not strain it too much, only as far as the wound allows.
And leave it for one to two days, as long as the abscess is not suppurating, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of various plants, flour, powdered frankincense, aristolochic acid, and similar things.
And make powder from these things and apply it to the wound, and apply medicines without bitterness.
The wound should be cleaned well, so you do not put on any ointment, nor do you assemble bows, because when bows are assembled on the skin, it often causes great pain to the patient.
When something sharp is put on the wound, it may cause the patient great pain. Preparation is necessary, as no accidents come to the patient if we follow what we have said, if it is doubtful, then there is doubt.
And if nothing is coming out of the wound except for medicine, then you must apply a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and one part of glue, and then put the sharp thing on the wound. Then, apply the wound in various ways that are safe and healthy.
1. If no party of the shoulder ever breaks, whether one or both, for they are two bones.
2. And the other is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is bowed or twisted, and then it heals.
3. And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut the small dose or pertuss of the shoulder, and set the fracture at your index finger, and to the pouch as long as the bone does not return to its natural shape. 4. And do this lightly, and make sure the patient does not feel pain from your touch.
If the break is in the part of the toe that is not the big toe, and it cannot be brought to the heel, then you should put it as even as possible at the end of a thick finger.
And if the fracture is of the second part, then if you repair it again, you will have to restore the first joint, if you please.
But if not, then after the ninth or tenth day, when the wound is healed and the stitches are removed, and the fracture is in one place, then proceed with the treatment.
Or you bind one or another part, if the fracture has; and the bandages be so large that they fill the abscesses with pus.
2. And no restorer would say that one must soothe the wounds with butter, and each one will die. It seems to me that this is well, but it is necessary that they be made in the fashion of oven-baked wheat and milled mill powder. Then leave the tent, as long as the bone is frozen, and the cartilages harden.
And never once do they put their geese's wings in the tent, and if it is loosely draped and stays in place, and blows the air among. Or make what you see.
And if an abscess forms at the site while you are working, and it comes to the point where you put on a cloth or cotton cloth greased with rose oil, or in a small vial of laver.
And if the wound does not ooze, then apply plaster made of flour and powdered frankincense, mixed with beef broth, then place light spoons, and do not tie them too tightly.
And if the wound is small and broken into thin pieces, and they are broken into pieces that can be easily managed with this, then cut the fringes, and the treatment of things enchanted charms, and soothing, if like plasters and ointments can be easily managed with this.
And if there is no wound or small wound, if it heals, and it puts on bandages, as soon as it is healthy.
When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not deep, but only slightly so, and it is not broken into pieces, but rather bent slightly, which can be corrected with a slight effort.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the left side, that you cut your index finger in the mouth of the midwife. And if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then cut your index finger of the right hand, and lightly cut the fracture, and fix it with the other hand evenly, and hold.
If the fracture of the lower jaw is described as Level II, and you intend to provide extension to the second part, as long as it is equal.
And if the teeth move or fracture, if they are stretched from a gold or silver or silk thread, then put it on the broken jaw of the other side, and put two pieces of cloth. And place on the wound a well-made cloth or a piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it around the neck that you choose, and instruct the patient to lie down and give them light food.
If you see that the figure changes, if it is lifted up, and then set it back to where it was. And apply a paste made of flour from the bolter with a lot of urine or bread flour, after you have opened the wound.
And apply the paste on a light cloth, and when it is dry, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy. Many times, it is healed in three weeks.
And if the wound is infected, then it comes to the attention of the physician, as we have often said.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, the reward is a small piece of bone in the cast. If the osseous subtlety is easily covered by this.
And if the wound is wide, it should be stretched according to your need.
And when you have all these pieces of bone, and there is none in vain, if the wound is wide, and it is large, and you put on flexible dressings, for mending it as much as possible, until it is healthy.
The force breaks more times in front of, toward the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways.
Or it is broken and separated in two, and has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore.
Or there is a fracture with wound.
And the operation is if the wound is as the fracture is with pain, that you have two assistants, if the one tint the helper that feels the forceful fracture. and extend the other arm to the part.
then place the wound equal to your two sides, if it forms as it should, and there is no appearance or movement.
And if you have more to extend, then place the shoulder bone of the patient away from the wound a round sphere made of linen or wool, and it should be large according to your need. and extend and gently apply the force, and pull the sphere to your hand so that you place the wound equally, if it should be.
And if you do not take the head of the strong one away from its place, because it comes in front, then the patient will feel pain on their hateful side, and put their elbow or shoulder down, and bend the spine of the strong one as much as the bone of the strong one is raised.
Then attach the wound to your two sides, and if you have dislocated it, then it should be that you fix it back.
and take away the lighter pieces, and if the head cannot be joined by any means, if it is one of the ones you have. but that you use the full force of this instrument to see if it will work:
and seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as it is intended to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will:
and has two heads, if you see, and the larger ones are for larger wounds, and the smaller ones are for smaller wounds, according to the swelling of the wound you made when you treated the bones:
When you are sure of the incision, if there is pain, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt the incision, if you use the wound with dressings and bandages, according to its quantity.
2. And if aphrodisiacs are used, and it comes, if much oil is needed, and linseed and mustard, and wine, and put on.
The irritation of the bone is when it feels pain and tightness, it is that you apply to the bone the plaster of the ground and flour of oatmeal and a soft cloth, and a small amount of water, if you have the means. Then take a very thick bandage from a palm leaf, then put the dough twice on the cloths, and apply it. Then take a thin needle of three inches in length and one inch wide, and wrap the thread around it, so that the knot is at the end. Then place the needle on the bracelet, turn the thread around the loop, and remove the healthy nail, and remove the sick nail. Then tighten each part, and when you see that the nail holds the bracelet firmly, and you see clearly that the thread does not hold the broken part, then reward each one, and when it is tightened, put on the restraint.
And make the sick nail on its back, and it puts a small hole on the other side of the shoe when it sleeps, to lift the helper to the top. If you align the fracture of the bone by aligning the shoulder, or if you tie the arm to the collarbone, and it does not dislocate due to accidents, then it will be fine in about 20 years.
Then continue the exercise, if you see that it is useful, and pull and release it as much as it needs to be restored.
And it will be restored in 28 years, with no harm to anyone.
Of the injury to the shoulder
Only the shoulder breaks or becomes wide due to the bone, and it does not dislocate unless touched.
If the acetabulum resembles the shape of the fracture, and it is adjusted according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
Then pour powdered mill with a lot of meal, and light spreads, and put on double fold. Then put on a large and thin sheet, a bit larger than the shoulder, and if it is well fitted when the sheet is removed from the shoulder, if you use flax threads, then this sheet fits well.
And then the strap is tightly tied with a large iron band, if the sheet does not move from its place, and watch the line each hour.
And every time it is pulled apart, if it is held steady, and the head of the shoulder is forced out of its place, and the patient feels great pain on their chest;
and the spine is restored in 20 days or 25;
And when these numbers are completed, if it does not happen, and you are sure, because it is only the bones that are made to feel lighter;
And if a piece of the bone protrudes before, and there is no sign of inflammation, then it is done, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of reducing the swelling of the abscess.
of the fracture of the bone
The weight is never broken in a million years, but this happens rarely. but it often breaks at the knee.
And when it is broken outside, if it is dislocated, and it feels great pain, and there is lack of blood, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it feels well.
And the restoration is when the patient feels pain on their back, and the head of the shoulder is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed, and the heads of the second ribs are assembled in your hands, and subtly put in place as much as the bone seems to fit;
Then apply splints and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or another light substance, and wrap it around the broken bone, so that it does not move. and tighten the tie as much as possible around the back, and pull gently, and reward each hour with a drink, and if it relaxes, then tighten.
and if it hurts to uncover, either due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or gangrene, if you haste, then uncover, and remove the splint, and attend to what has come from the ways of treatment.
Then reset the cauterization, and hold it firmly until it is secure.
Of the breaching of the ribs
Fractures of the ribs only occur after great force is applied to the back, and at the top of the shoulder blades, and they do not displace unless they are greasy. And it feels well in examination as it should.
And the restoration is if you place the breaching evenly, as it should be. Then place the plaster, and tighten with a needle, if you have the skill.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the shoulder blades, it feels very great pain and pressure, as if from tears, because the bone points to the cloth. And it aches all over, and often vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is very unhealthy, and the ancients have put much faith in it.
And if it is said that it can be administered meat that inflames the belly, by pinching the nipple with the girdle.
We do not do this, that challenging does not come, if it has not come. And if it comes, if it is healthy.
And say no one of those who put suction cups on the leg, to suck out the poison, and it seems right. However, it is not certain that the suction cup does not draw out the excess from the leg because of its weak position.
And none of them would cover the shoulder with oily powdered lint, and then put tents between the ribs to measure the liver's turn, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that points the girdle, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to break the costal cartilage of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put a suture instrument to hold the skin.
and therefore it is necessary to drill the bone, and draw lightly, and then cut the lips of the wound, if they are large, and cleanse them with emplausters as long as they are healthy.
If the abscess ruptures, if it comes with smooth oily cloths on the leg, and on the limb.
And treat the limb while it is dislocating, and keep the cloths on the chest as needed, until it is healthy.
And also to the spine of the back.
When there is no pain, and you see whether it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel any pain.
Dangerous are those that are mortally dislocated, and if they do not move and feel well when extracted and not stretched, dangerous are those who say the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put them in treatment.
And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you hold the bones in place, and if the accidents are those that are in the hands, and on the back there is a jump and a sense of wanting to vomit;
And when it is dislocated on its side, it suddenly ejects with will. When he is lying on his back and sees a shadow, if he cannot. Sacrifices that are fatal: If he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not come, if it is something lighter.
And the treatment is that if he complains of pain in his abscess, if you place on it ointment made from rose oil or oil of mustard plant, as long as it is soothing;
then place on it a comforting plaster and wrap it in cloth, and tie it with a cord, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healthy;
If any bones break, then cover them with a cloth. If the bone is large, then sew the two sides of the wound together with strong stitches, and then apply ointment by anointing it with oil until it is healthy.
If the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone," take your right hand pouch and put it in your left hand, then place the splint and clamp it on, if you are skilled at it.
Then hold it tightly, and if it is broken further, then cut it off, and the bone, and treat the wound as much as it is healthy.
Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
When the bone of the ankle is broken, and if it happens, unless there was already some pre-existing injury at the top; and becomes long and twisted, and turns inward at the joints, and there comes pain to the leg, and swelling, and the broken part becomes inflamed;
And the restoration is that you extend your hand as far as the broken bone; and examine those that are the break and the shape of the bone;
And if the break is only at the top, then set it as straight as possible, so that it is in its natural position;
And if the fracture is long or it declines to the bone, then I order the patient to lie on his stomach as long as the restoration of this fracture is not clear. And when you have placed it evenly, then place a rule of flax or leather, and tighten the string, if it does not move.
and use the leather as far as the cost is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if abscesses appear, and they come, if they are not pricked, as long as the abscess is not pricked, and place what we have already said before. and then return to restoration, and tighten as it is possible, if there is no other accident.
Of the shoulder dislocation
1. The auxiliary is that which is between the upper and lower part of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the following two methods:
2. The other method is to use a thin, straight piece of bone, according to this form:
3. And then fasten the heads of the bones, and hold them in place, and put the surgeon on the seat:
4. Then the arm that is broken at the shoulder must be placed on the seat, as it goes to the narrow part, and has a piece of bone in the middle, then can hold any heavy thing or extend the muscles:
Then place the forceps evenly in your hands, as long as the forceps returns to its original position as intended.
And the other way is if one holds the patient down while they are in pain, and lays their hand on their collarbone, then commands the ministers to touch the parts where the bracelet is on their hands, and touches the others lightly all over the limb, and spreads each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then force the limb to move against the bracelet, and move the bracelet, and stretch each of the ministers to their part.
And if the forceps is bent at the shoulder blade, then you must tighten one string on the back and the other on the front, away from the forceps.
And if the forceps is bent towards the elbow, then you must tighten one string lightly, in the direction of labor, as long as the forceps is even with the shoulder blade and the elbow.
Then place the forceps as intended, as long as it is correct, and tighten it, hold your breath until no pain comes.
And if the inflammation comes, if it is not strained too much within seven days, and it is put on with fine thread and olive oil, as long as the inflammation is calmed.
Then the strain, and the way of the strain if you put the splint on the wrist, then assemble the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
And tie the bandage, and strain on the helper, and on the arm, if the arm is in its place, nothing should prevent it, or if the bone is not moved.
If you doubt that the bone does not move, then use these, and place the incision with a wider and stronger needle than the others, and let there be one space between each needle and two spaces between the parts; and each space should be as large as it passes through the incision three times.
Then draw out the needles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, making them stronger and not moving them.
And if you see the seat of the needles and the traction, as we have said, in the direction you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess, if it is left alone for nine days, as we have said.
Then look at every third year's link, whether the itch does not inflame or it does not reach the limb because of its being too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur, then it should be done after three or more years, and the patient lies on his back, and has his hands on his stomach.
And put the helper in a simple linen bandage, and observe every hour or half an hour, that the broken limb does not move, or is not loose in the joints.
If it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and the meat is cut in this manner, so that the meat is first divided into small pieces. And when he wants to take it back, if it is large.
It is customary that the helper and the leg should be returned in XL jors all the time. and therefore it must be deslided and given baths and ointments for the leg to be cared for.
And if the structure is stiff and thick, it should be eased and delayed for 40 days or 2 months.
of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile" ones, and some are smaller, and it is this that forms the pouch.
and the others are large, and it is this that is opposite to the small one.
by chance, only the large bone breaks, or the small one, and by chance they come together.
When the child's teeth are broken, the restoration is light and the healing.
And when the large ones are broken, if it is not a good healing, and more crooked than when they were broken together.
If it is only the small teeth that are broken, then it will be sufficient to extend lightly and put even.
And if it is the large tooth, then it must be tightened more strongly.
And extend it over the fingers, and raise the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the teeth must be lower than the others, and it should be crooked on itself, and the cusps in front of it higher than the others, so that the patient suffers no pain.
Then extend the ministers of his arm to the opposite side of his hand, or to the other side of the elbow, and some other ministers to the other side.
And then he places the bone in its place, according to its best form.
And if it is in pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no loose ends that point to the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set the bone and the fracture.
And if with the force of the wound, I have spoken to the single chapter. If it is taken care of.
And if at the beginning of restoration, post-operative scars appear, which are made from ointment made of rose oil and warm wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft, nor too sticky. and it is gently covered until the post-operative scars are soothing.
And then the bone is cut, and he puts the template of the powdered flour with a lot of urine, because it sets the stitches, and it should be the shoulder of the bracelet that is larger than the others.
and he asks if it needs six stitches or arms in more positions. So that the bracelet is either in one of the bones, or in two.
And it is drawn more on the bracelet than elsewhere, and less by moving it away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And the clothes that are on the bracelet are wet and slippery, and are not hard or rough.
And the clothes that are on the bracelet are wet and slippery, and are not hard or rough. And let the child, whose parents are far away, be born with a large or small body, as we have said.
And reward the member and the limb after some years. If any accidents come to the member, if itching comes to the member, and you must heat the member with hot water as long as the itching is calmed.
and let the member rest without being stretched.
And then resume the stretching, and if the limbs are softened and the bones are exposed, and it seems like something, if it is removed.
And if the knots do not come to the member because it is too tight, because of which it is necessary that you loosen it immediately, and let it rest for a while until the knots are untied, and then stretch it.
And if none of these things happen to the patient within twenty years, it is not our fault.
Or if you are in pain, then you can put your hands on your chest, and make sure your shoulders are level, and move slowly and gently, and sleep on your back.
And this cauterization is restored in XXX years or XXXV years, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the shoulder dislocation
Be cautious that on the back of the hand, and in the wrist, there are few dislocations, and only slight pain comes from it, many times.
When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient is able to hold it steady, and holds it firmly in front of them.
Then the patient places their hand on the extended bone, and extends the fingers of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the joints, as long as they are well connected.
And they apply the plaster and bandages, if necessary, and then place an elephant according to the quantity of the limb. And it is wrapped in a single layer of linen.
And if the fracture is at the side of the plantar arch, I make a spool of linen, and instruct the patient to stretch it over their broken plant. and then the strain of a long loose hair, and it is the weight of the hair as heavy as that of the hand, and it is stretched, if it can be.
If the fracture is at the hip, then if you can place a splint on it, and another in the foot, if the hand is straight and erect, then the leg will be completely fixed between the two.
And if the cauterization comes to none of us on both sides, if it is closed, then it is tightened, if it can be; and it is stretched with the hand, and if you see if it makes a right small thumb to raise the cauterization, and does not move;
and if the cut is on both sides, if it is as in the index or one of the others, if it is tightened, and it is held with the healthy hand that follows; If you tie them all in one place, according to their value, or if you put them on a scale, as you would;
and take care in the restoration and positioning of the incised abscess, and cut off what comes, as I have said.
The bone of the thumb is often broken in many places, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward.
and the restoration if it is tied with the pieces of the fracture, and the other is loose. And the patient lies on their face, then extends each member of its link to their equal part;
And it happens when the fracture is broken from the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the joint, then one or more of the ligaments will be torn in the direction of the point, and the others will be left alone.
And as it reaches the joint, then loosen the knot of the knee, and also extend the leg.
Then place the bones of the bone equally in both hands, according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and the patient should not move.
And if it has stopped bleeding, then let it rest for a while and return to your work and your care. The bandage is made in parts.
It is necessary that you wrap it around the fracture, doubling it in II or III, and removing the excess, then bend the leg until the heel comes to the root of the nail, and tie the long end between the thighs and the leg, loosening the knee joint, and they should come together at the knee;
Then turn the leg and the thigh of the leg, then put the splint on, and put a bandage on the bone of the leg.
Then use the fifth leg between the thigh and the thigh of the cloth so that it fits evenly under the bandage, then begin to tie the knots three or four times on the splint. And as more is added to the splint, the bandage loosens less.
Then take the second pair of ropes that you have tied between the thigh and the thigh, and tie three knots on the ones that are already there, then return to the end of the cord at the foot of the second pair, as long as you see the pulley.
And if it does not move from its place, then let it go, and then it will not have any abscess or swelling or other sign. And if it comes, and it is addressed as it comes, just as we have said many times.
And if it has pieces of bone that prick, then it can be set; and it can be done. And if it cannot be, then the shoulder must be cut, and drained. And the treatment will be as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
And never has the elbow been broken in place when we put the splint on it, as in the shoulder and arm.
The first sentence to translate is: "Toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.
And advises that the cheek is restored in L years, or less than less, according to the different complexions.
It is said that in the right knee joint there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, whether it is only a sprain or a puncture, and it comes to all wounds and hurts, and it feels well.
And the restoration is when you put the hair back in its place as soon as it has grown evenly on both sides, as long as it can be gathered together.
Then apply the cautery, and use a round stylus, if you are skilled at it, and pull on it as necessary, then reward all the adjustments we have mentioned for other fractures, such as wounds and other appearances. if you apply to each accident what is necessary, as long as it is healthy.
Of the break of the leg
It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "muscatel" and the other is called "fascicule.
When the wrist is broken, as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, it is restored in the same way as the other arm. If both bones are broken together, then turn the leg of all parts.
And if the subtle bones are broken, then turn forward.
And if the large bones are broken, it feels great pain, and one sees that it is well. and turn around.
After stretching it, put it in place, and straighten the limbs evenly.
But it is necessary to make the fracture look good, and if there are more pieces, then the extension should be less severe and lighter. And the alige according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, if you take two pieces of twisted hair that prick the leg on both sides and are long enough to reach from the knee to the ankle.
Then wrap the leg with II the bend and from the knee to the ankle, and tie it tightly, and at this time do not let the leg sway to the right or left, and it is well.
And no one maintains the length of the leg, and it is of hair, and it is tied on the leg to prevent movement, and this is done properly at the fracture or wound.
and shake each leg to see if it has an abscess or another injury. if the treatment is healthy.
Of the break of the bones of the shoulder
At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the shoulder never break and must be very strong, and they only crack in more positions.
And if there are many broken bones, and you see the bones thrusting against each other, if you put them in the earth as much as possible, just like when you run, then place your foot on the ground, and then lift the bones as much as they can fit in their sockets;
then place the splint and stitch it on, and then make a small tableau at the bottom of the chest, then pull it to the foot, then wrap the cloth around the foot, and other things that you have skill in.
And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, for you will find that the bones are broken and dislocated.
If there are any of the two breaks, if they are restored, if we have said so, you must do it with your hand. Then place the other end of the stitch according to the length of the first, and make a larger pocket, then pull the thread that I have mentioned, and tighten it evenly.
And if there are more than two or three breaks, if you place one stitch according to the quantity of each, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and tighten the knot of the thread. And if you are hanging the end of the stitch below the belly of the knot, so that it does not burn.
It is necessary that you do not overlook the other things I have said about other fractures, as soon as we have said them. And cut off every accident as it comes.
of the fracture of the small finger
When the bone of the female pelvis is broken, if it is made larger, it then leans towards the painful side, and should be held by the buttocks.
Then fill the gap in the nature of the cloth-making woman's leg with a thick piece as I have.
Then bend the woman, and gently bend the back little by little, and then pull out the cloth-making woman's leg as much as it enters the nature, and return the bone with the thick piece.
And when it sees blood, if the bone is loose, and when it bleeds, it is reset, and then it takes seven days or more to heal. If the fracture is reset, and if you see, take a bowl of milk, and tie it around the wound, and pour all the milk into the nature. Then blow into the bandage as much as the milk is absorbed from the wound. The nature will then heal the fracture.
Then it should be filled with cotton, and left alone for seven days, as long as it is healthy.
When the bone of the arm is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh.
These fractures are not uncommon to those who study and use it, and they read my book.
For the fracture means in more ways the right way of restoration: understand the doubts.
In the meantime, when it is broken, take an ox's gape and pull the verge. Then wrap it with bandages and leave it for three days or until it is completely healed, and it will be healthy in a short time.
Of a fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, whether it is the bone of the shoulder or the helper, or seeming, that they are now healthy, if those wounds that we have said testify.
And if the healthy wound is that it re-bleeds, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the fracture in the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not die.
And if the patient does not die, then leave the restoration for the next day, as long as the patient is calm and does not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause other accidents to happen.
If the bone is broken, it is located at the point discovered, so you should place it lightly in your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extensions are not apparent for you to make them even with your hands, if the rammer has this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the size is according to the quantity of the wound. and therefore it is necessary to prick three or four times, according to how much he has experience in each case of fracturing.
and be sure and have a good one, and it should not wobble on the compression of the member in your hand, and also in front, and large on the face forward, like this.
And it is called a "paliscade", because it should have the heads of the ribs placed on the edge of the apparent bone. And the bone heals once, as long as it regrows, and it is even in comparison to the other. The second line of the text is translated as: "And if the fracture is subtle, and the bandages cannot well hold the bone, then it is necessary to cover the top of the bone with the bandage, as long as the bandages have power.
And if you do not manage to return the bone, as we have said, if it can cope with an instrument suitable for this, whether it is a forceps, an incisor, or a hook, to your advantage.
Then use this which is more difficult in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
When the bone is re-set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, seek medical attention immediately, as there may be a problem with their natural joint.
If you make it as if it were in its place, then wrap it with black vin slip, and properly, that's how it should be. and do not put anything else on the wound but oil, so that it does not come to sweating and corruption.
Then administer the ointment when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it completely, according to the size of the wound, and make sure you apply the ointment well so that the wound is not stretched with the break;
and many times it has caused the patient's pain, and have brought the physician or the patient to death or corrosion at least; and let the scabs be more moist and softer than the others;
And if the wound is large or grievous, and you doubt that something has gone wrong, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if you do not manage to put on ointment immediately; But envelops around, in the shoulder of the arm, hard bands, and tie them.
When you see after the first or second day that the wound has healed completely, and if you have used antiseptic cream on it, and you have applied a salve to relieve pain, which is a safe and effective remedy, then proceed with the following steps.
It is necessary to stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is sore and healthy.
It is necessary that the member be aligned in some way so that the bow can be applied lightly.
If they persist, and it cannot be held steady but moves away from the bow, you must try to reduce the fracture with a splint, and all those pieces that cause pain must be covered with the bandage.
If an abscess comes to the knee, or any other form of infection, if you are able to treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
And when the bone is broken, and opens the member, just like the bone of the elbow or the helper's arm, and other similar bones of large members, if it is not treated, because many times death comes, but it is left as long as it bleeds.
by chance heals by him after 20 years or 30, then treat the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, then leave it.
Many times after the fracture of the break, but when it is near the joint, and one should see the appearance of the limb. And by chance, it cannot make the limbs its natural position.
If you want to know if it is fresh: If you have applied friction medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and senna, and similar others, if you do not take any of these, or all together, and mix them with warm wine or with enough beer or with vinegar; and put them on the wound, and extract it well, and do not let it slip in your hands.
and put them on the wound, and extract it well, and do not let it slip in your hands. And then let it slip, and continue another one, until the nodes are fully healed.
If you strain a well-made piece of cloth. Because the property of the cloth is that it all the folds of the members.
And if the nodding is already converted into hardness as a piercing, and it is sore to the finger, then the crown of it, and makes the superfluity appear. Or you shave it as soon as it is healed, and the care as soon as it is healthy.
The first sentence to translate is "dou membre qui est foibles après la garison". The translation is: "the
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it becomes less after the weak and subtle members, if it comes from various causes. If one of the bones is because it was too tightly tied, and was not properly cut as it should be. Or because it had too many knots, and could not come to the joint of the member. Or due to a large number of knotting. Or because of too many movements at once, he did not hold his breath well. Or because there was little blood in his chest, which is weak.
And if the treatment is that you make the patient lie down and tighten the cloth around the chest until it no longer multiplies in him. And he is given water, and he then feels better and relieved.
Then he places salt on the member, if it draws out the swelling, and the blisters often form at the great pain point, until the swelling reaches the member. and he is reshaped to his natural shape.
The dislocated limb after the injury When the limbs are twisted after reshaping, and the bones are broken open, and the formed member is crooked, it does not follow its natural shape.
If one does not believe the words of those who say that the limb must be broken in several places, and many others have done this in our land.
And the first part of the treatment is blamed, and great harm comes to it, and by chance the patient dies.
However, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and they are not washed with hot water, or herbs that soften are cooked, like figs of vismalk, and roots, and honey-like substance, and similar things;
and the second part of the treatment is a mollifying agent, if well made, and you take the vismalk fat, and cook it with linseed oil or sesamum oil, and apply it;
or you take fat figs, and roast them with animal fat, and similar medicines that reduce the saliva;
And never is there a stop to the node when it is continued and long with wet hands. And let there be no movement in the limb at all hours.
When the tortuosity is aroused and made rigid, as with an incision, and it is needed for the bone, if it comes close to the bone, under the subtle and light cut. and put on bandages and study in the treatment.
Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sensation to the arm.
For if we are late, if it swells, and by chance if we put it back on the shoulder.
because it does not matter how we move it on the arm when it is swollen. Many times brought to vomit and other pains.
Indeed, when this happens, if I make the patient better, then let him leave, as long as he is calm.
Then the hot and oily member was raised, then it was gently reset, and each limb was treated as the patient's own limb had been treated.
I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations by the pieces of bone.
There came when the mandibles were dislocated, and the dislocation of both was in two ways: either they are a small piece of their bones, and are made soft; either they are entirely dislocated and hang downwards, and cut the saliva from the mouth that cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wrap around the tongue with speech.
If the dislocation is small, it can return to its original position through various adjustments.
And if it is entire and accomplished, then you must reset it as soon as possible, and do not struggle.
And in such a way that the minister marks the head of the patient, and pokes the eyes with a small part of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which causes the mouth to be closed by II parts; And the other two hands are deformed to make them equal.
And instruct the patient to smooth out his cheeks, mandibles, and move them from all parts. 2. And the teeth are placed evenly, as they should be in his mouth.
And if the cheek is twisted, then it is the same as the two mandibles being assembled, which are oiled with hot and oil blisters, until they are lightly twisted.
1. There is no need to force it, as we have said.
6. And when they are returned in their place, and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if you cover it with soft cloth made of oilcake and wax, then lightly bind it with threads;
10. And let the patient sleep on his back, and the head between two pillows, if he does not move to the right or left, and does not strain himself, but eats light meat, as long as the pain is tolerable and does not affect the jaws;
And then he cuts what he can see lightly, and does not strive to open the mouth with his finger and drink, as long as the mandible is well nourished and healthy.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reinserted at once in an hour, and are not converted to their original shape, then if fevers and customary colds come on, and by chance the abdomen becomes distended, and by chance vomiting of pure bile occurs.
And when you see this, then you will know that it is a mistake. and many times died those who came, in nine years.
The force cannot be dislodged from the cost, due to the continuation of the effort and the pain, and it is never loosened at the end, and it is felt to be so.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms. and then press the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return.
then put on the splint and the bandage, and tighten it.
The head of the shoulder that is towards the chest cannot be reset. However, if it does not move at all, and if you reset it on your shoulder, as we have said.
Then place the cauterant and the bandage on it, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest as soon as they are able.
And then you should return the head of the shoulder to its place when it is out of your shoulder.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
It is said that the shoulder is not dislocated unless it follows three methods.
The first method is that it dislocates at the part of the bone near the socket. The second sentence translates to: "and it is at the lower part of the foot. The third sentence translates to: "and by chance it was dislocated in the heel, and it happened little.
The fourth sentence translates to: "and did not dislocate the shoulder or the arm from the elbow.
The fifth sentence translates to: "and more often it dislocated the knee towards the ankle, even those who have little strength, because in this jump it was most dangerous.
The sixth sentence translates to: "for those who had some strength, the jump was not high, and it returned low.
And by chance it happens to some men that they strike or crush their shoulder, and stretch out the shoulder with an abscess, and take care to have it dislocated by this.
It is necessary that you try it, as long as you are sure. And therefore, begin the treatment.
And when the dislocation occurs as it moves towards the axle, and you make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a fissure, and then pull the axle towards the head of the shoulder, as if it were some ones; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, and make no movements;
and if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, because you can clearly see it at the axle;
For this manner of dislocation is not difficult to correct when it is new, or if the child is healthy.
And the manner is to gently hold the hand of the sick child at the top, then pull your thumbs apart, and gently bend the joint at the top of the arm. And he holds the hand gently, extends it upwards, then places it apart. If help comes.
And if it does not come as we have said in our hands, then it is necessary that the child be bathed in warm water. And the ointment is made of soft and soothing ingredients, such as honey and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and it is applied.
Then let the patient lay down on his back, and place a pillow under his head evenly, neither too hard nor too soft, then place the foot of his leg on the pillow, and gently lift the shoulder of the upper arm, and hold the hand of the patient.
and some other assistants smooth the shoulder of the upper arm, if it does not move at all. That shoulder is now back, and if you see that the dislocation is reset in this way:
and it is that you are present with homes that are larger than the shoulders. and it is that there are two directions to the costeit, and bolt the shoulder under the pillow of the patient's arm, and gently lift the pillow above the shoulder, so that the shoulders hang in the arm. And some other hands treat the patient's hand down towards the belly. If the patient is too light, and there is nothing heavy with it, then the dislocation returns now.
And it is also done in another way:
And it is also done by cutting a long thick thread, whose ends are tied like a pistil, and not too large or too thin: Then it is placed on the patient's hand, but if it has been too long, and the hand is too long and thin:
Then it is extended from the other side of the hand, and the joint returns to its original position:
And if it does not return to its original position for all these things that we have said, then this cure is not effective: The first line of the text can be translated as: "Take two strips of cloth from the left arm, four inches wide, which will fit around the ankle, according to this form:".
The second line of the text can be translated as: "Then wrap it around the ankle, making sure it is not too tight on the patient, then place it below the ankle".
The third line of the text can be translated as: "And extend the arm above the elbow, then wrap the aid around the elbow, and the other end of the arm, then tie it with a large buttonhole, and leave the chest hanging from the other side". The joint now reveals itself.
And when it is in place, in whatever way that may be, if you happen to put the palm of your hand a linen thread as even as possible, then place a sprinkle of flour on the mill with incense and wool all over the shoulder and around, then tighten the thread on the palm again, and turn the lace on the sprinkle, and wrap your hand around the arm at its collar, and let the hands remain still.
And it is necessary to dress it as little as possible, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
and then dress again after 5 or 7 days, and move it. And if it is tight and not softened, it will be cured.
If the joint is swollen due to moisture or another reason, and it has not subsided after three days, then it is necessary to apply a cauterization at the third position, as shown in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you follow all of this, and after 7 weeks, the joint does not hold, and you cannot raise your arm forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened. And you should suspect that the joint never returns to its place in the shoulder.
The dislocation that is towards the knee, and the thighs, or the buttocks, if it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and it is maintained by another application;
and be cured as soon as it is healthy.
And after the healing comes pain in the limb, and later in movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as that pain is not relieved, and returns to its original state.
of the dear dislocation
If the joint that is difficult to move is dislocated several times, and it is dislocated again;
and has become dislocated from all sides, and even front and back, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it is seen well and felt well; and is dislocated according to each figure; And when you join the male member with the female, if you see it open wide. For the joint is weak, and cannot grip the arm, nor touch the shoulder with anything.
And it is necessary to reset it every time, even if the arrowhead comes out, because if the arrowhead comes out, it would be difficult to put it back in;
And by chance, it cannot be returned to its original position, indeed when it is at the bottom. If it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and by chance it comes to death.
And the reduction if it is, when it can be returned, you can extend your hand to your two hands. And the arms are expanded, and the hands are stretched according to the cost, from the top to the bottom, and the joint is held at its nook or at the root of the palm, as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension.
and it is that two servants extend the arm, and hold it with two servants, so that it does not move during extension.
then turn the arm in each part, then wrap a long and wide strip around it.
and when you see the joint of the joint in your hand, if there is no oil to lubricate the joint, then break the joint formation, as it reforms.
and when it is at the shoulder, if it is covered with dry powder with beef dripping, and the formation is made, and the arm is tied at the neck of the patient, and some jors are left, then it is removed.
If the joint is closed in its place, and it is left alone, and it does not move.
If you see that the joint is not tightening well, and it resumes the cauterization and the ligament, and it leaves for a while until it is firmly fixed. Then it is left.
If the patient feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes still, if it is bathed and cleaned well, and pressed until it is calmed. Or you can put a fat sheep's wool around the joint, then leave it for one night and the bone, and let it enter into a bath. When it happens, he should clean the joint immediately, then put on the splint again, and then take a bath. And then repeat this 2-3 times until it is healthy.
And if you see, if he puts on wool that is damp and hot with butter, and stretches it.
if it returns to its original position.
The dislocation of the hand.
The shoulder joint dislocates, and the return is lighter than the other joints. In short, it is advisable to return the dislocated shoulder to its place as soon as possible, if it is still dislocated, or if it has swelled or has had an abscess.
And if you place the maimed hand on a table and extend the fingers, and measure it, then put your palm on the appearance of the joint, and pull it as it regenerates.
Indeed, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well with him. Then place the maimed hand on the table with extension and measurement on the palm. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then he should place his hand on top of his arm on the table, and he should see if his hand fits into this appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, then the strain of the emplasy apostemic causes the hand to stop, and it should be allowed to rest.
If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in the shoulder after some time, then the injured joint will become even more tight.
and does not believe that as long as the hands are inflamed, and cannot hold anything at all: you realize that the nerve is cut, or the artery:
if there is no other engine but to hold by fire cauterization, and by chance there is nothing else:
When the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the probe that we have mentioned, then it is tightened and left for a while, then it is loosened and left alone.
If it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, if the hot poultice of wool is applied, and the area is friced as much as possible when it is dry.
of the dislocation of both hands.
Never has been dislocated the thumb of the hand in any place, never at the back of the palm or in the belly:
Then comes the first sentence to translate. Here it is:
and he lets it lie for two days, and then sets it evenly on the third day.
and from the limb, as we have said, and from the movement of the day, and then it is relaid.
and do this often, as long as it is wide, and then do the same, if it dislocates in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy.
and do this also, when it is dislocated from another part.
The dislocation of the shoulder joint is due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight
When the shoulder joint is dislocated, or if there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, it can cause death to the patient.
And the sign is that he jumps and feels like he wants to hold it, and cannot hold it, and many times the members are softened, or the knees or the shoulder or the elbow.
And many times the eye is still at IV parts.
That which remains motionless in the rear is called "glibosity".
The cure is that you reward it if the glibosity has come from childhood. If there is no cure or treatment, then total destruction will occur.
And that which comes from choking or drilling or similar things, the ancient methods of treatments by great words, or it has no great profit at all.
But I have abbreviated according to my intention, and have formed straw men in various ways.
I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is neither health nor sickness.
and also those that come directly in the second ribs, and can be cured only if the one who comes to the back is properly done, as I say.
and it is that the patient's shoulder is extended over his face in the first shoulder and has some strain on him, so he does not bend.
then the bandage is formed at the top of the head on the ground, and the other is made of another piece, and a line is passed through the loops of the patient's shoulder, and the other is tied, and the heels are tied, and the calves.
And two surgeons stretch the joints, one at the head and the other at the toes, among the two thumbs.
And be well closed, as we have said, and the patient places his hands on the spikes formed, as he looks up.
And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a third arm of the elbow, cut off the nail, and the patient should be on his side, and cut off the head of the nail sucker, then place the mileu of the nail on the spike. and place his hands on the other end of the table, and press well, as he looks up.
If you see, if I do it on the thumb that turns on the hand. And if you twist the tendons of the shoulder of a man's arm, and turn them to the other side, and between each tendon, there is one long piece of stone.
And in every tendon, if the thumb turns, and they are firmly attached to the ground, so that they do not move.
And between each tendon, if the thumb turns, and they turn with it, and there are two small tendons turning with the thumb, to turn the thumb.
And then tie the knot that is among the girths to the chief, and the other knot to the stirrups on the other side, and each of the ministers turns his saddle tree to all the knot, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is evened, if you apply a desiccant ointment with much urine, and then the stools, and then the pill of a tablet of III doses, which turns the limb grievous and the healthy part of the spindle, then the knot of a tie, as we have said, and use the subtle remedies of Nero, as long as it is healthy;
and no thing comes at the end of health, if it is necessary to administer lubricating and softening medicines with the stylus that we have mentioned before. and never has any medicine been administered, and never has the appearance come at the back of the spine of the patient's stooped bone, and ensure that this is a dislocation. and it is the bone that has opened, because we cannot have too much confidence: by chance, death might come.
Experienced that the joints of the shoulder and the elbow are only dislocations, and they do not come with other joints;
And the joint of the elbow is dislocated according to four parts: First, the muscles and tendons are stretched, and then in front and behind.
And more muscles are stretched, and it becomes dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations is clear if, when the injured leg is joint with the healthy one, it is longer and more open, and the injured bone can double its girth at the fire; And it is the one that is deformed due to strangulation of the wound, because the head of the bone comes out.
And the sign of him who comes to the forge, if this accident is contrary to these fronts.
And the signs of him who comes to the front, if they are well according to his completion, there is no need to multiply the genital sensation with pain, and if you see him doing so, before, and retain his urine, and it will be discharged, and when he goes, it passes through the anus.
And the signs of him who came to the rear, if he cannot expand his gentle, and double, and that leg is more tense than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is raised against the costal bones.
The symptoms of this kind of dislocation are that if you reward it with the dislocations, they are ancient, and they depend on its position, if there is no cure. and it only requires presumption.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, it will be stretched and deformed, and the head will turn to the left and right. If by chance it returns, and there is no other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong support, and straighten the leg with both hands, or with the one you are lying on. and some other supports extend your hand in this way that it covers your hands with its nails, then straighten the leg by pulling with a line below the knee. And some others tie the head with a line.
And extend as far as possible, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and hold it down.
This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If this is not the case, then it is necessary to provide care for his appearance.
If the dislocation is at the shoulder, then it is necessary to bring the patient to the surgeon's care if the costal cartilage is still intact, then tie the ligament around the root of the clavicle, and the bone that is dislocated, then tie the ligament towards the angle and towards the force;
then tie several other ligaments in his arms, and wrap the largest bone of the dislocated shoulder, and extend it to form the deformed shape; If he returns to his original position now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have said, then it may happen that you feel the two feet of the maimed person assembled under a strong arch over the two ankles and the two thighs, and that the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the others.
Then let it hang suspended from the head of a post, and let it be supported by the two arms of length.
Then instruct the attendant to bind the head of the cux, and have other attendants hang down with the maimed person, who bind the cux, because the joint returns now more securely.
When the dislocation is at its worst, if the patient is in great pain, as we have said in the case of gout, and draws the limb away from the bad leg properly, and also the weight;
Then place two bandages, one on the head and one on the other end, then thread the bandage between the limbs at the bad joint in the form of a bow; and it should be padded with wet cloths to prevent the joint from freezing, then extend each medicament towards it, and he puts them evenly in his hand, the dislocation;
If it returns, it's good.
If not, place it there, and press as we have said in the gilt-side, and guide the member on the safe side.
And when the dislocation is before, if it is necessary to extend the bad leg firmly, and according to what I have said; And put the patient's pain on top of the sore, then press with the other hand, and draw it towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is at the elbow, and it cannot be extended with the therapist's hand, and they stand on the ground, then it must be as if the patient's shoulder had been dislocated in the same way, as we have said about the two shoulders. And it should be held on the face, and the extension is made as we have said before, and it must press on the joint to the table. And it will be at its limit when the therapist extends the legs, and they will be equal. Then reset the dislocation, and put the splint on, and hold it with a bandage, so that the pain does not move. Stay in bed for three or four days, then remove the splint and put it back on.
If you see that they are equal, if you strain them, then leave them for three days.
Then remove the splint and start walking, as long as the limb is comfortable.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways. It is known to be dislocated from the front, back, and side.
and do not move away.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their knee at the ankle, and if the heel does not touch the ground, it is dislocated.
And the restoration is that you make the patient lie on their side, and extend the leg if possible, and place your back on theirs, and place your hand on theirs.
Then take the patient's knee in your hands, and move between your two fingers, then bend the two bones that form the knee. and other assistants extend the leg, as long as the knee returns to its place in the body, and the signs are that it is well bent at the ankle lightly.
and put the plaster on, and make the leg straight at the knee, and assemble the fingers together in three or four lines, then take it off.
and do not work too hard on the joints of the elbow, as long as the limb is comfortable.
If the limb is not present, and extension is administered with great force, as we have said in the treatment of sprains, until it is healthy again.
of the dislocation of the big toe
The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is bent and twisted.
And signs if the ankle is swollen, and try before the part where it is dislocated:
If the limb is light, and it should be gently stretched with one's hands as soon as possible.
And when it is dislocated completely, if you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the limb with one hand, and with the other hand, pull the knee towards the chest.
Then pull the pet on your right hand twice, and then on your left hand, and pull it up gently.
and do this twice as we have said, by bending and pulling the pet.
If it returns, that's good.
If not, if the evacuation does not return, because it comes back.
And if it cannot be returned, then bend the hand on its side on the ground, and make sure the passage is firmly pressed against the ground between its fingers, and hold it loosely so that the hand does not slip.
Then the minister tints the cuxe, and some other ministers extend their hands or to the limb where it is located at the collar of the shirt. Then all ministers extend correctly, and the splints are placed either side by side between the joints of the patient to hold the joint in place when extended.
Then the patient places the dislocation in their hands correctly, and some other ministers mark the healthy leg at the ankle, and the dislocation returns quickly.
And when she presses hard, if she applies plaster and bandages over it, and forms the wound, and ties the thigh to the leg, and wraps the nerves that are at the ankle, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
Then it is left for two or three days, and if it does not become smooth, it must be straightened.
Then the bandage is changed every three days or four, and the patient should use the splint for fourteen days. And if it does not improve by the end of the treatment, it is a sign that it will continue to dislocate.
If the wound becomes inflamed and comes, if it is necessary to calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
Of two things, one is that the If both are dislocated, and they are able to be extended gently in the work, it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in no way near the shoulder blade or collarbone, it is necessary to put the splint on the upper part of the shoulder or on the .ie. table, and place your hand on the open joints, then press firmly with your hand until it re-emerges.
When it is equal and it does not open, if he puts his thumb on the point of the shoulder at the head of the humerus, then the dislocation forms and he leaves it alone for three days, then he removes it. and he makes him rest, as long as he is healthy.
Of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are piteous and merciful and slow, do not be harsh.
and use at the beginning of things reassuring aphorisms to calm the patient, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope for health. and when you see hope, now reset the member in its place, otherwise the dislocation will worsen.
and when the member is in its place, apply reassuring things reassuring aphorisms to calm the patient, and treat the wound, if necessary, with desiccants.
and if the dislocation is a fracture, and the bones are broken, then the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
You must not enter the path of despair, according to what I said, for this is good for you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of your arm and heart.
