O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made an end by its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout everything, so is the science lost and diminished, and nothing remains of its strength except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And because of this came the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Now it seems to me that I will revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; And I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary for him who undertakes it to mount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of origin.
And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work a little. and also in the art of hand.
We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, should guard himself so as not to err and to injure people.
and just as I have seen many times more than these who involve themselves in this science and abandon their science and sense of experience.
For I have seen a fool who has made an incision of a carbuncle or neck of a woman, and has also cut into the arteries in the neck. for which so much blood came out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I have seen another physician who was treating a stone from a man's body, and the stone was large so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called for to treat it, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
And I saw another wound that took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound;
And the poor ignorant healer strained the fracture over the wound as stars by very strong ligatures, and did not leave any of xalene to the wound, and left it thus at the end;
and he commanded him that he should not untie it;
And remained thus that the leg was all swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it, it was in peace and he felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not heal it.
And did not cease the corruption from going through the member until the member was completely lost.
And see another sight who burst open the abscess, and then inflamed it with the malice of its lord.
Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not befit that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupt.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into II divisions: that is to say, works where there is peril in many dispositions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard against them, so that foolish people may not speak ill of you.
If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised.
and leave the treatable diseases to a better health;
And remove your weapons from that which causes you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: “Take no care for ill-health, lest you be called a foolish mirror.”
“I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.”
The first chapter is of fire cautery and of medicinal cautery, and it is the chapters ordered from the head down to the feet;
and of the forms of the instruments, and of the workings of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of suction cups and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
And are the chapters ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is to restore dislocations and twists, and similar things;
And are ordered from the head just as far as the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the help and the nuisance of each complexion.
I say that the quality of the help, and the nuisance, is the longest speech and subtle science and the secret responses;
And of this speak most sages, and agree to this;
and I suffice myself little their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterizing helps universally to all complexion where it has matter, for  it complexes: This is to know complexions hot sense matter, and complexions dry sense matter.
In a hot and dry complexion together matter, they said none and said that cautery is great help; and the other said the contrary: that cautery is of no use to illness that comes from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured of a hot illness by heat, nor by dryness;
and says he who says the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men. Because when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it no time through experience.
And in all ways, let no one intervene except he who has practiced it and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time;
of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that  cautery assembled fire is of the secret of cures, and of greater good than cautery of burning medicine.
Because the fire is simple, and does not come out except to the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if he is named.
The burning medicines come from member to another in separating, and bring to the member illnesses of grievous healing; and by chance kills the patient.
The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things.
and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I deprive you of the secret which is revealed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon what time the cauteries should be made and when they are to be applied.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harms arising are lessened by the help of cautery; and also if the cautery is for necessary pains, except and until they cannot endure the time that greater evil comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as foolish men do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus:
and they say thus: but it is not as they think, for cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is better than medicine for the speed of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its lordship.
And a certain thing is that the disease comes never according to the complexion of the patient and its place and its virtue;
and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if this is not cauteries administered where there it has little superfluity and moisture, like cauteries of bone for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens little.
And many people do not understand for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is so.
But they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer manners of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth.
Therefore it appears well that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cauteries of instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and for the height of its substance.
And they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause rot, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some men.
And gold cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they said. And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
and if one heats it too much; as they do in fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the heads to feet, for that the vein be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two kinds done because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitudes of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine solutive modifying the head III or IV, according to what the virtue and the age and the habit of the patient can suffer. and then make a hole in the head of the patient.
And then have him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs;
After that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds then apply the cautery which is called 'olivarius', because of this is its form: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and do by descending and pulling your hand back and forth turning. Then raise your hand slightly, and look at the spot if you see the bone little; and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you.
After that take a piece of silk, and put in soft cotton inside it, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
After put on above a softened cloth; And leave on as long as the burn is removed. After treat the wound with an ointment that is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healed.
And they say the ancients, that when longer it stays open the wound, more it purges. And for this so help moves.
And they say none of these that one must let the cautery as long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one must let the cautery as long and thrust so strongly one lowers the bone also wide as the whorl that women put in their spindles for this that the humors come out moved.
and one must leave the wound long uncovered; after it one must cure and treat.
And these two manners of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except in certain men where there is a way of fear.
and I believe that I should leave it.
because the head is weakened by the continuous dissolution of nature, as we witness in other members;
and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more wholesome and useful for me, and from this I operate in such a way as to assemble health.
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, then the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of purgation of the head and oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we have said before, and it is not effective Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution, and is not too cold. then cauterize it with less heat than the one we have said above. After making the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery at their place that is called "vessels"; and put them in where one puts  suction cups. and align your hand so that you cannot see up to the bone. the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I shall speak of it later;
and it is fitting that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the jaw is purged by medicinal infusions, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help. then I make cauteries according to two ways, that is to say of sharp medicine and of fire.
The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and remove the rind and cut it into two pieces as big as the jaw, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the piece of alum under the skin.
and when it will be placed there, bind it and restrain it well and leave it so for twelve hours. And then untie it and treat fiercely with garlic ointment, and leave the wound so for II days or III. Then put a cotton swab soaked in butter over it as long as possible.
After curing with ointment until it is healed;
and if you see it doing so, do any of the burning remedies that I have written or read how to treat burning remedies.
The fire cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery according to its shape, which is:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a key or has one curve at its top, and in the middle a small appearance.
and put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady and move the fire slightly for a little while, until half of the thickness of the skin is burned.
and gently touch your hand so the artery doesn't burn, which is fiery, and flows abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awad of silk, and put it on the place for III days; Then I put soft cotton dipped in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare," do it all at the tip, and guard against cutting the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you cure a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not help it, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
And thus reign over the place with a line of half a finger in length, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come to the bone.
And guard the jawbone that moves when it is moved, and let the nerves only attend to the movement and that spasms do not come upon the patient, and guard against blood flow from the artery when it is cut, or cutting may cause great fear even to him who does not know, and who is not a student and experienced; and let the work be in the middle way;
but I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at its place where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed;
and if you see, administer the cautery as we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; And this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
Of the pain of ears from cold.
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened it with medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called 'point', of which here is the form:
After prick all around the ear of the sick person, or around the two if the pain holds in both, and you move a little up from the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to burn. And make ten points around each ear;
After care the place until it is healed.
Of the torture of the mouth.
Torture which must be cured by cautery is only from those that move phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
and do not make a cautery of appearances that come from dryness and swelling of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torture which is silent with phlegm of eyes and expectorations of head and gargles, and that does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and put the cautery in the part that is healthy, and make cauterization in the part of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery as long as half of the heart is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And is the likeness of the scalpel that we have set before, but it is a bit more subtle and it behoves the knife to be a bit larger;
after curing its place as I have said before, until it is sound.
When a stroke is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I make four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle, which is called 'vessel', as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
To this sickness it behoves to give the patient large doses and pills that clarify the brain;
After kings lay the head of the sick man flat, and he puts upon the back of the head the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in plasters
and this is the manner of the cautery: if the fire as I have said.
If it is healthy so, good is; and if it is not so, then he makes III cauteries of the head descending until the neck, and there is a space between each cautery one palm;
and cures it like the others, and if you see it joined, and the patient is suffering, then he makes one cautery in the middle. and if need be, two others on the two horns, and cures it as long as it is healthy.
and let the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be purified with herbs and those things we have said before.
after rinsing the head of the patient, then do cauterize in the middle of the head and on each horn, and behind and III on the spine of the neck.
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is intense, then do IV cautery on the spine of the back. and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand. after the care as long as it is healed, and be the cautery which is called "olive" that we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptic should not use cautery other than that which is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to purify the brain with herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from much medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then one makes gargles and chewing changing the brain often with good meats;
After the king's head in the middle, and one makes the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; And if the patient is weak and suffering, one makes cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, one makes the cautery subtle according to this manner:
When because of melancholy are the superfluities or moistures corrupted and phlegm thick, then one cauterizes with such cauteries as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
And if by reason of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is before in the division.
After raise the head of the sick one; after make the pad of linen well done, as also the circle, so put it in the middle of the head;
and the sick one sit crossed, and be held well on all sides;
after present the linen, and it is worth smearing of wool fat ancient; and the heat to fire moderately, so that the two if he put it can suffer; after empty the circle from within in the head, and let it cool;
and do this to the sick one each week once with another good government, as long as he be sound.
Or if you see them cauterized, making many points on all the cautery.
This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
and then puts on moistened cotton in butter and fat of gooseberry.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do give the patient something purifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
After, he commands him to put his head back, and make him cautery in the middle of the head, and make him two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one.
and make all the cauteries on all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple;
And guard against the flowing of blood, and if you see too much blood issue, so restrain it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the cautery how you will stop it.
And no time is a cautery or hot iron applied below the two bones behind.
And one sees that these are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the art descending to the eyes: I cauterize in the middle of the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where a hot iron is applied below the two bones. and if it is needed more, cauterize it wisely above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you medicate it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient III nuts each after  the king the head, and make a cauterization or middle of olive oil cautery; and make two cauterizations with the cautery called 'clavilis' on the two eyebrows, one point below the hair;
and be careful of the artery that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavilis':
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called 'olivare'. of which this is the form
And if you see so, it [cauterizes] on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
and do not let the hand go except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one does cautery according to these two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient on their healthy side. after on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as well as the leaf of the myrtle, and it be the beginning of the sign beside the hairs;
then one puts cotton moistened in the clear of an egg and mucilage of pellitory on the eye, then heats the cautery of this which is the form:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the hairs be burned there at the place;
and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave so three days, then one puts cotton moistened in butter as long as the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment as long as it be healed.
And if after this, the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, just as you did first.
And if the hairs are burnt, cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye at all.
The cautery of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf;
then take French soap and quicklime, each a third, and grind them together well. and do it carefully so that it does not cool, then on a board above the form you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put over the eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then one should work in that one, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the yolk of an egg;
and the head of the patient be in your hands and put your hand showing on top of the medicine, and press the pus and the yolk all times that the patient feels a biting from the medicine, because it feels a bite like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your hand. And when the biting will have passed, then lift the weight of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, it is well.
If not, then put more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set.
then put moistened cotton in butter until the embers are ashes, after which cure the place of the ointment which is called "dyphenis" and others, as long as it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to work well on your work with great care that it does not fall from the eyes of the medicine.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin again the medicine on that one which is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before. afterward cure until it is healed.
and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to those be your constraints.
and let not be returned the right way to him whose is the study of this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you cure fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cautery to him according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head on your healthy side and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it lean its head.
after put moist cotton in the shell of an egg or in pear juice on the eye.
After heat the cautery which is such:
and it is curved at the head like the shape of a vulture's feather, together with that which is the cautery
if you see it, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see fit, it should also be like a tent.
But all the same, this which is curved is more suitable for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus and dry it And if it is closed, then perform the work, and treat externally the bone;
Afterward place the hot heated cautery on top, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part over the eye so that your hand does not move foolishly. And put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If not, begin the cautery again once, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for 3 days.
Afterward put on moistened cotton in butter, and treat with the ointment of desiccation until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered. and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
And there is a manner of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to a fistula, and cut its place; after put in the fissure the subtle camphor of which here is the form: and make it to the quantity of one third of an ounce; and hold your hand over the camphor firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted resin does not run to its eye;
and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine or vinegar;
the resin so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer pus to the nostril, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nostril according to what is fitting in its proper place.
Of openings in the lips Many times, openings in the lips appear that are called "pimples," and even in the lips of children.
When you treat these openings as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then use a small scalpel cautery according to this form:
And place it carefully into those openings until it comes just to the bottom.
After treatment, cover the area with cerate until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made putrefaction and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit at all: therefore it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bot or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cauterizes at the bottom of it, and its last point;
and do this once or twice, after the cure that we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
and if it is healed thus, it is good; and if this doesn't happen, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and they don't help, then put the chief of the patient in your hand; After heating the cautery whose form will come after here, in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth;
and set inside the hot cautery carefully, and hold so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
After release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
After fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse fiercely.
And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the gum softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the cures of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery according to II manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a churn, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and wrap on the point of a tent, and dip it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see such wool and cotton dipped in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and place hot iron above it until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth;
The cautery also called fire is such that you take a piece of iron or steel, and it is thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
After heating the cautery, of which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter before applying the cautery, and then pull (it) forth.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever shape you wish, and according to what you are able.
and this is the form of the cauterizer:
of scrofulous sores When scrofulous sores are of phlegm and cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described after which comes the form, and have it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side.
and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for 3 days; and put on moistened cotton in butter until the burn is gone;
after care the wound with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
When the humors overcome on the channels of the body, and even when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines;
after that you make cautery to the root of the throat, and guard yourself that you do not come as far as the throat, and do not burn more than a little bit of  the heart;
After the fire cautery is made to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be as we have it described before.
and treat it as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and sickness of the fist is due to cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the sickness is ancient, then make II cauteries on the knuckle in their viscera. and the other cautery removes the pain between the two nipples.
and let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be according to the form that has been described before.
And if you see it, make cauteries pricking at all the cautery which is called "poins" for as its form is here before in the illness of the ears;
and let the points reach up to XXX, or where they fit.
After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at three fingers' widths according to this form:
And for these are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them at once.
of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After be sure the patient lies on his back and on his ribs; after lift the head which is inside the tiltle with two hands of your left.
And if the joint is dislocated inside, then cauterize it with the fire as it has two nerves in this place;
and cauterize the liver until it pierces to the rib, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries;
and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries;
and the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves;
And sometimes it is joined upon this one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
After put the cautery on, rolled with silk; after make the patient rest, and let not move the limbs by long time until he is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which seldom happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient heals.
When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it afflicts his complexion, and multiply catarrh to him, and in ways of accustomed cures and he profits not, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and his hands. From this then afterward make three cauteries one below the shoulder blade by the quantity of a die, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries outside the two ribs until the figure of the cauteries is in three angles, and have such spacing between each other that they are not joined together when they will rot;
and let the cautery be so perfect that it touches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see cauterizing with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach in a spot according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called "point".
After the cure of the cure that we have had before, until it is healed.
When the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forced out of its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his high-back; and sign of the third cautery according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the ribs of man come;
and have space between each cautery the thickness of a die; and let the cauteries be long from the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cautery;
and burn only the half of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms;
And if your will is so, you cauterize these cauteries of the cuticle, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would make the whole body dry; and let him not come near boiling water, for the ears are very delicate there, and one can see it.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong;
And if it is in the membrane, he feels sharp pain.
And when this cure fails to achieve its purpose, it is necessary that the patient be cared for on his head;
and then make a poultice in the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the sunbeam, because of this it is the form: And cauterize with the cautery until the ear be burned and come to syphac, as long as the puncture is all clean.
After the cure according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
And it does not behoove anyone other than those who have studied medicine for a long time and whose hands have cured these illnesses to use this cautery.
Therefore he may boldly operate, and in all ways it seems to me better to leave it.
of the cautery of pleuresis
The ancients said that one must make cauteries for pleuresis with roots of aristolochia, and in such manner: Take a root of aristolochia long, the largest that you can find, and whether it is dry, and also as thick and as long as your finger; and soften it in oil, and press it on the fire, and cauterize with this cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and II make small cauteries one by one descending in the part which is below the beard;
And he cauterizes between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little. And he cauterizes in the middle of the hip, and one on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two in the space of the two ribs under the fire cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not press your hand, but make it open as if smelling.
And they say that no one ancient used a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs until it comes to this abscess; and leap out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse of what we have said in the divisions of the cures, and it does not benefit, then they apply three kinds of cautery that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before.
and do not hasten your hand with all the cautery, and let the patient be propped up on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and raise the heart which is placed in the mouse, or the cuts from the patient's side come toward the left, and be the elevation that you raise the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After it burns the two nerves inflamed as long as the heart is pierced from the other side, and then drive out the cautery, and so there will be four.
And if you see, burn all the cautery to three nerves.
After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before mentioned.
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the mouth, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place near the breast; And let the cauteries be well close to the root of the heart.
Afterward leave the cautery open to prevent putrefaction for a long time, and do not let the treatment of the sick person after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have in front shows; And that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is set before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is hydrophic, and are full of yellow-green fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger. and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, so that the yellow-green fluid is forced out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After do on each leg two cauteries at the point of the calf. and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, that the fluid may issue.
After the treatment of other treatments that we have said.
When a belly solution comes from cold and moisture, as much as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are debilitated, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, in the circulating cautery; And four cauteries around the buckle subtle to all the cautery clavicle subtle, and two cauteries on the kidneys.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the hip, and the cautery on each groin, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are at the base, or one or more, and they are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, which is all outside below the armpit point and point in triangulating, and I cautery below the bud II must;
and if you think that its stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then to the face one does I great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long time. After curing the place until it is healed.
When you cut thelul, have the cautery heated which seems like a razor, and then put it all blazing on top of that thelul cut. and leave it as long as the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood doesn't stop.
Do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each one as we have said. after the cures of ointments benefiting until they are healed.
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the body, there will be more help.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such illness that can only be cured by cautery.
When to any one comes fistula, and is enveloped and laid corruption and moistures corrupted, so the does prove to all a tent subtle, and guard that thou knowest to all the tent how much it has of parfont.
After heats the cautery which seems I razor, and puts it in the fistula according to the quantity that li tent there entered, and recommences lou cautery until cil corpse porris and corrupted be burned, once, or II or III, according to the quantity of som behoove;
and guard thyself from harming the nerve which are inquin, and the great veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, so guard thyself of these places, and do not make those fuers than in place carnous, and think that she is not mien persons;
After cure the place as long as it is healed, and if the places are clean, and the materials are removed long time, then you know that the places are entirely healed.
And if the materials are not removed, know that the places are rotten, and the bones at the root are corrupted. And thus as one of these that we shall say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great flatulence, and does not take any talant from woman, then it behooves you to make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before;
And if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be III cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, both right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the distance between one thumb and another;
and make that cautery on fire on the back, where it is needed.
And let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously stated.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow; And when they come, there is great pain: Therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the vulva, as we have said of the bladder cautery, and two cauteries on fire on the back;
and let the cautery be of the clavicle, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the bone of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and it is found that the place of the department is visible, so you should cauterize the patient above the bone of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle;
and let the cautery be like that with which one cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make III cauteries of the olive large, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others;
and treat until it is healed.
of the hip pain When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment is not working, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other pills that seem to be good. After this do cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such:
that you cauterize on the socket of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them good depth and wide, and have between each cautery a space the size of two, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
At no time is cautery made in the middle upon the head of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have before said in the dislocation of the hip;
But do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the flesh be burned.
And this is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach as far as the thigh nor as far as the leg.
And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, then one makes II cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds him, and I cautery above the ankle IIII fingers, to the left part a bit.
And let the cautery be a cupped blade, and let it burn the thickness of the heart.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two inches of the foot or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain three or four points with the cautery which is called “points.” And if necessary, if he does more.
And if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, do cauterize with the cupped or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do no more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cauteries on the ankle of the foot, and left it there so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the whole foot. After a stomach solution from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.
And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, because this is how it is done, make it like this iron and be at the top as big as a thimble or a little less, and be by interlaces and be from one interlace to the other with space the quantity of a finger's knuckle;
And let the interlaces be towards two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be in the hip iron well made;
And this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and give off a smell, and then put it on the side of the sick hip, and let it be turned over onto the healthy side;
and the cauterize once the cautery is on and let it for three days. and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered long time. after the treatment of ointment as long as it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery out of fear of its danger, and we see few who use it.
and nevertheless those are good cauteries, which he can suffer, and where it is needed.
The cautery of medicine burning is that you make the instrument in entrechatres in which descends the margin of the door, and be it of iron or of steel to a long point, and in its height have two, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a die; and be opened from above and below, and they join together according to this form:
After place the hip bone of the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand well upon the hip bone; after put between the two circles of the hot iron which is heated to fire one point, and leave him an hour to ten, and suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it.
For there is found medication also as of fire;
and when the medication has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip bone of soft wax, and leave so three days, and put upon butter as long as that which is black from the scald is removed; and let him for three days until corruption be drawn out;
and this would be the last aid after the care of ailments until it is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or leg, then you do the instrument that holds according to what you have done in the hip augmentation.
and this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written it or treated it of the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where it has the small opening where the point of a razor can enter.
where it has the small opening where the point of a razor can enter. and put this pot into another pot well leaden, and put above alkali and quicklime and sweet awe until there is twice as much above the powders than you would have well gripped in your hand;
and let him so until it descends like a fever and stool or as much as possible, then take all this matter, and put it on heat and alkali as before.
And then it will be much fever and is administered in various types of medicines and cauteries of other members.
Because it does work like fire, and with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hip as well as turpentine and honey of cashew and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure where one man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and he praised it very much, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after.
And say in this manner that you take the green earth litharge, fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and the boil.
And let it sit for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn.
And then make him enter into a bath as long as his body is a little aroused, and let him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and will be healed.
And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fire of sheep, it helps a lot;
and must be done the cautery in this manner. Take linen and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow that is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called foscile.
After take fibers of dry sheep, and wrap them in fire until they are embers, and put it on the linen, and leave it until it is extinguished;
and do again in this way, and do not cease to do thus until you think by sense that it comes as close as the hip, and that the pain is ceased;
and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of sheep".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by sitting or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar cold matter that is spread out, none of these resemblances are worth cautery, except for those that come from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after those things that the patient is void of stinking pills or other similar ones, that one makes upon his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed with an incisions, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
and be made the cauteries according to the cautery which is called "point";
And if you see, make III or IV cauteries at the middle clavical cautery according to this form;
Many times comes this disease to little children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow throat when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and want to cure it, if you cauterize it with the cautery of this one according to this form. So that the cautery scorches each part of the spine equally.
And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery II lines or III, and let the points be near each other.
After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery in proximity which is in the space of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints is from humors which are spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in feet, that which the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
Make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then do cauterization to the whole cautery as one claims "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and these happen many times, then do cautery on each knee III cauteries or IV of each part, to all the olive shaped cautery;
And if you have need of more, then do more, but do not hold your hand further than while the head of the cautery is burning.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, so make points around the bone two lines.
and if there remains no pain at the two joints, then do nothing on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the armpits or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government to the patient and prescribe medicines.
For if you make him good governance and purge phlegm, then he will be healed by the help of God.
When rupture comes in the buttock and the testicles descend to the groin and it is new, then when you see him cured, he must not move that day; and that he uses things which make the belly low, so that the intestines descend from his belly;
after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his leg as long as the testicle is repaired, and move them to your groin, and rule of inch below the rupture on the bone of the hip, and all one sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it is white and it gives off a smell Then reset the bones to their place; and the assistants hold his hand above so they do not return backward;
and work well the thighs on the patient, and put underneath him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other upon the hip which holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the mark with all your might, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again once more until you come to the bone; and beware subtly that the bone does not jump when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other ills.
And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of the bone, and of big people as large according to their measure;
after III days of cure the place of the fire cautery as much as the burn is removed
after the cure of other ailments as long as he is healed, and lie the patient XL days on his back as long as the wound is well sutured;
and it is necessary that his dressings be lengthened, so that the boil do not protrude when he tries to go into rooms.
And after XL days, when he wants to rise, if he is given a well-made splint, and wear it for another XL days;
and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too great repletion of drink and eating, and of too much heat;
And when he does this teaching, he is healed entirely.
And I shall say hereafter the cure of tailoring in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, make the fire cautery on them according to their quantity, and either burn one-third of the tumor; after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients said that it must be cauterized with the three-angled cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place of incision and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another one below, and hold your hand in the middle of the cautery clamp.
But the first cauteries are lighter and finer.
Of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or from striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
If it is healed from the first cautery, it is well;
But if not healed from that first cautery, begin another cautery on top of it, because such a custom is that it must heal to the limb that it is nearest to, for which reason it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healing.
The ailments are helped sometimes by cautery with great help, and also the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see it being cauterized, take care that the patient is at the beginning and if she is cured according to what we have said in the division and does not send nor remain, and you doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the whole sick person, then make V cautery on her head: I put one on the back of the head and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair. And II on the two horns, and I behind on the nape.
And let your hand so that the cautery comes until the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the big humors can escape.
And cauterize the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if the mess is spread everywhere and it loses manifestly, so it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries which we have said or chief, and I cautery on its nape, and II cauteries on the spine of the neck, and VI cauteries on the spine of the back, and I great on the hip and the other below, and II on the two shoulders; and II on the elbows, and II on the tendons of the leg, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and guard the nerves that are on the rear heel, that you do not burn them;
and never has one made a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and the other on the bone of the stomach, and the other on the liver.
And knows that when more is done cauterization, the more it does help, and moves him profit;
And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as a healthy person does, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
Afterward, cure the wound with a mixture of flour of violets with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When a swelling comes in any member and is treated by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member.
and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
And at times one makes a cautery and to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
and nonetheless, let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the sickness called "albaras" is  enshrined, and the tools of medicine are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery in a spot through, according to the quantity of the thickness of the heart, until the redness is removed, and its color has changed.
then cure it with flour of veils and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and blood from alondrine, of each one part; and be mixed all together, and be tied with a cloth, and be aired in its place until it is healed.
the cure of the sore by cautery
When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, if you cauterize it with a cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.
And nonetheless the sages say that one should make cautery also in the middle of the ulcer;
And nonetheless those seem to me not good, because I fear that it may become more ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wished for it to happen any time;
And more appropriate a thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called 'circle,' as we have said in many types of cautery.
When someone has a malady that is called "adubelati," and it delays in dying, either because of the superfluity which it makes or because of the water of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see him hasten to die: therefore, cauterize it around with a small number of cautery points; after this, leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it burning with the whole cautery, then heat the cautery as this form is:
And put your hand in the middle of this malady which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the kernel, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning from outside in such a manner that the course of the rot is alleviated.
After this, cure it until it is perfectly healed.
Another manner of malady there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing else than a rot of a limb, for it gnaws at the members as dry vines do lines.
If you see this illness in a place where it can endure fire cautery, then sharpen the cauteries, small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the illness is.
After cauterizing all parts as much as you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places crushed ointment with oil as long as the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the cure of ointment generating flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh is not born, it is good;
and if this is not the case, then begin the cautery again on those that remain corrupted from the places.
And this malady has at times been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery;
But nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure with hot medicine in the division; Take it when you need it.
Of sprouts that come to the feet Many times it happens that on the feet due to fire a sickness is born which is called “closed” according to our understanding, and it is a very bad thing that inflames the foot.
And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water.
The cautery of fire is that you heat the iron cautery as much as is a goose quill feather, and make it of good iron to the measure that it may pass over the nail from all sides, and that it have subtle edges;
After he puts everything hot on the nail, and turns your hand all around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail. and he leaves it thus for three days until it begins to rot. then he makes a poultice of wild mallows crushed with wool, and leaves the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then he cures the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then you must bring them water cautery. and it is in this manner: Take a piece of iron or steel, or a feather of a vulture, and put it on the nail and the other thing, that is to say warts. and put the iron clamp so that it surrounds all around, then place a piece of hot wax on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the clamp comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep to the root;
and let the patient endure a bit the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave him like this, and it will detach itself from all its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you have removed all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate flesh.
When some tremble from cold nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then it behooves you to make them IV cauteries or IV on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and for the cautery or weight, and on the stomach with the olive cautery;
if you let it tremble, and hasten the health of the cold sickness.
Sometimes appear through fires the body bathed, or painful pustules, that come from large corrupted matters.
so it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by the fire, or of long aristige root, or with the lens cautery.
And sometimes the cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from within forward, but are disrupted the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things. and it is a very grievous thing to stretch.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very hard until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop issues any more.
then put on fire the olive cautery smaller and larger ones until they are all red.
then grasp it, either large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another cautery from the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is extinguished.
And guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another evil does not come upon the patient.
And know that when without a court of the artery, one cannot well tighten it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the IV ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines placed above which have power to tighten blood; and be tied and restrained firmly.
Who will bring tightening by tightly binding with bandages or placing hot things above, or other similar things, if it does not profit him no.
And if this happens to anyone and he has not put any medicine present, then he must place his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein. and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and retracted.
And make incisions forward where he has need of cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and the incisions, and the causes, and the instruments, and the shapes of the cauteries;
and have put this chapter up to the knees, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it easier, those who want to.
And so as I begin these, it is fitting, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason more great caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. Because many kinds of people come to treatments. so they come from those who are so sick with their illness that they die easily because of the severity of their illness, and the greatness of their evil; and of these one must have fear.
And there are some who give you their senses, and say: Wait, I am healed; and the disease is troublesome.
It is not proper that you allow those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely to those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and benefited from.
and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted.
And this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and long memory.
My dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Now I have ordered this chapter for you in chapters, according to what it is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have devised from the head to the feet, so that you find more easily those that you will need.
Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the child's head;
and sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown.
And I have never seen this illness in anyone other than children, and to all of those that I have seen it has hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work to such cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew each day until it could not support it;
and  the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone above the sacrum, between the heart and the bone;
and the work is such that if moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you make a wide split between the two.
and also as long as II us, as long as the moisture runs.
and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, you make II slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the chief open from each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you make III slits in the middle of the chief according to this manner:
And after the incision, draw out the moisture completely. After extracting the slits of drapes and powders, and puts wine and oil in it, and leave thus until the fifth day;
then unbind it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the main bandage be fastened, and then give the patient dry meat of a small amount of moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess and the assembly of the liquid;
because sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right side; and never once on the left side.
Then cut the abscess opening and fill it with water, and do what you can in that regard.
and guard that you do not cut the artery. and blood comes out so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone a disease that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or chest, and the illness is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then as the last resort the cure is cauterization with this one that you cut the two arteries.
It therefore behoves, when you are about to cut them, that the patient bends his head backwards. after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck towards the cloth. then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are then placed back.
then mark the veins of the incisions, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from two parts, as long as the vein reaches to the bone, and this be by the width of the head.
And if you see it, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting as I told you across.
And when the vein is cut, then blood will jump out from above continuously.
And if the artery doesn't open at the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark incisions and make them to the bone;
and this that it is necessary to put the blood out is six fingers' width, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery;
Then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone without any suppuration, then cover the wound with a poultice so that no abscess comes, then strain the wound and bandage it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine When an old migraine comes and acute catarrh, for the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit him, then we shall drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes his hairs of his temples backward, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not easily found outside than in some men who are too cold.
and if it is put back, restrain the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and apply hot water to the place until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which here is the form: then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upward with pincers, and carefully separate the webs that are under each part;
and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the point of the probe, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all at once.
And draw blood from the VI (six) parts, up to III (three);
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the closing of the wound, and bleeding does not occur.
Then cut the superfluity which is between the two ligaments in that same hour, and then, if you see it, so cauterize with the cuticular cautery until the bones are reached;
and this is the better work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot complexion. For the cautery is aid to finish the humors: for this reason it is of greater aid to the humors.
Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on top tightly made tents;
and when they are removed, so be it cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with tents, until it is healed;
and if without court of the artery as long as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain with your hand that the blood be stanched. and if you do not have this present, then put on the place your cloth as long as the blood is clotted, and raise the place with cold water as long as the blood stops, and be restrained as it is fitting.
And it must have between the two blades one doit of thickness, and then when you have signed to enchase the two places, and you put the red iron on until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be kept apart between the two shoulders because it is not completely welded by this cautery at all.
and this is the form of the cautery:
and that which is mooed and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery trenching from two parts, but the trenchings be well thickened to guard longer their heat. For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less its heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes descend into veins that are above the temple of the head and it does not benefit from any treatment of medicine one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feels or forehead throbbing as if with tremors; and where the skin is damp and so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are dry, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this treatment. And they called it the ancients "contused cure," and is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And they called it the ancients "contused cure," and is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the clefts be like II must take out all the forehead downward to the eyebrow, and the others II as II ribs from above the papers, and guard yourself from cutting into the arteries that are at II ribs from above the papers;
and keep your hand away from the continuation of the II jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of III must across joined.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping the blood, then put the spatula sharp from II parts where here is the shape:
From the incision which is from the temple to the second incision and scrape all the flesh which is between the two incisions to the entire surface that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract the entire spatula. If in the first incision you put the instrument which is called "cultellar," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
And put the sharp edge toward the flesh of the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches that which opens towards the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision until the other end.
and then draw blood evenly, and press the place for the blood drawn;
then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that no abscess come there.
and on the third day untie the bandage, and there administer much boiling water, then ointment of basil with rose oil, and other ointments used to heal wounds, until it is healed.
When with any eye comes acute cataract, and you see the eyes dim and small, and the vision weakening, and the whites burned; and the hair falls out, and where it is chiefly they feel sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that this matter and this cataract comes from many veins, and the treatment for it that is here, if it is true;
And it is that you command the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great cut between the brow, and another of wide in the cheek. And beginning from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone. And keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
And when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, and bandages. Then bind above cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess.
When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as cartilage begins to form, then treat it with drying things, which cause scar tissue to form.
In such manner: Take two parts of flower of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster. and administer it on these wounds to prevent flesh from growing everywhere.
Of the stoppage of the ears
All that which is lodged in the ears is one of four things: or grains, or animal matter, or a piece of stone, or similar thing such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, lentils, peas; or things flowing like water and similarly and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or some other thing that does not fit in the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, distill any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer the extraction; and make him sneeze with condiments, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear upwards.
Many times healing comes from this treatment;
and if it does not come healing, administer to him extraction with subtle pincers, for this is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, it's good;
If this is not so, then administer extraction to the fine inner part of the small fold.
And if it does not jump by this means, then make a cane of iron and thrust the head of the cane or perforation of the ear forcefully, and stop that which is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter there with the cane. Then the treatment is to make firm, because many times it comes as we have said;
And if it does not come firm in this manner, then take some glue and take the eyes, and put into some instrument which is sharp for that purpose, and put a bit of cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and treat firm.
And if it does not come firm from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to cut open the ear so that an abscess comes out, and spasm;
and the manner of cutting it is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it hangs; And let the opening be like a crescent moon, as long as you reach the stone, then the bone according to your strength, and suck it gently with your mouth.
And the treatment until it is healed.
And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
And if it cannot be drawn out, then administer a spatula thin and subtle according to this form: And administer an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think that the grain is wet because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it;
then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the water then that drips into the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a cleansing of conditioners first and wets the ear with old cotton. And let him lie upon that ear itself where the water is. If it leaps out by this means, it is good.
If that doesn't happen, then take many stones according to the length of your finger and light ones, and heat them a little in the fire; and put them in the patient's ear where it is perforated, and let it be held up by his foot from the other side, and place another stone upon the one that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this of stone for stone until all the water has gone out, and then it will jump out completely.
And if you see it, then take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and set the other end on fire until the end of the reed is burned.
Then redo the other part of the joints as long as the liquid comes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section.
But if it is large-bodied and can be felt, then administer extraction with tweezers. And this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section and where we treat distillations, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: If no worms appear, then treat them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the needle that is shaped like this:
And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle point in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed to all the vein. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, so stop around the vein with cotton as I have said in the stone;
And if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations;
And if distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see: And be of silver or of iron is narrow below at the small hole, and above over to distill.
and to press inside the distillation the instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cautery, and the cautery be in the ear;
then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil be distilled or at the end of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and so is the distillation a little bit heated at the fire thus one distills it in the ear; and guard that it be not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping of the ears
No child is born who has no pierced ears;
And this same thing happens to men through a swelling of the wound, or of flesh born within the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from being pushed into the ear, if one cannot see it.
And sometimes it happens the point of fire is lost, and one sees it well.
Therefore, that which comes in through burning, if it cannot be seen, is of great harm in many situations, and in this one you should put the ear of the patient to the sun. and look inside: if you see the apparent hair, then this is how it formed in all of its shape.
And be acute and cutting before and behind everything full, so that it does not cut the ear;
If the hair is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and cut it lightly until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the hair is implanted in the ear, then take a fine razor and lightly heat it on fire, then put it where the body of the ear is.
If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and guard so that you do not wound the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol;
and if you see the ear inflated, it is necessary that you draw the tent and move another moistened tent in cerote that is made of rose oil and wax, as long as the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove bleeding which are or treat distillations.
This poultice that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and tweezers, and the scoop a spatula of its roots; then put on their place powdered vitriol.
And if without a decortification, then cauterize it with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterize after the incision is useful;
and many times they return, because nothing stays from their roots and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of the groin Many times come in papers things that seem groin in shape and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "graindin," and it is an assembly of thick moisture above and below the paper; the work is such:
the work is such: take warning if the graindin moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know
do then the wide cut, then the scrape of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers and the scoop
if you cannot scoop it without feeling a bit of the paper, do not harm the patient.
and if the opening is great, stitch it together, and care for it until it is healed.
and if it is small, do not apply force, because the flesh will restore itself quickly and prevent scarring.
And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and having grasped the hailstone with tweezers,  hold it and press on one side and the other.
and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not matter.
and when the hailstone is cut, leave the salty water solution, and care for the area to prevent scarring until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that forms in the thin membrane above the eyes, and this happens more often to children than adults, and it grieves their eyes much, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears well up in their eyes;
And for this reason they lie on their faces sideways, and sleep on them, and are their papers under their eyebrows moistened that the inflammation and the appearance have covered with the exina which opens in the eye. And when you press the place to your two thumbs and feel the exina between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your bosom;
and then takes the linen sheet, and prepares a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exina from each part, then puts it on him; and presses with your thumbs on one and other side, so that the exina is assembled in the circle;
then makes in the middle of the moisture with the pointed spatula a cut wide, and be not more than the wound that one makes to the vein opening;
and make the skin smooth until you reach the bottom and in many cases the bottom comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then extract with all your strength between your two fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as it is spread.
and keep that you do not add in the incision, that you do not come to all the spatula until the eye, that you do not squeeze it.
And if the bottom does not open at the beginning of the incision, then carefully widen the incision slightly until it opens;
then extract it as we have said, then moisten dressings in vinegar and water, and put it on top, and secure with bandages.
And if it is to such men who grind seed and put it on top to corrupt the moisture that has settled.
Then cure until it is healed.
And if it comes to the place an abscess, then cure with plasters soothing until it is healed.
Of the hairs of the papers When in papers hairs arise adjusted other than the nature, and are spoiled, they harm the eyes, and bring many diseases like accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes;
and it is the cure according to IV manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine sharp according to this one that is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitch or by canes, according to this one that I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your own, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, it is good; if not, then put a needle into the whole thread above; and be it beside the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow beside these hairs, and pull the thread upward to the whole paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make in the part below the paper, under the hairs adjusted, to the whole spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small;
then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then place on top of the paper a figure of an eye, as the leaf of myrtle, and anyway it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is divided into all.
And if it is necessary, one should cut a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is.
Then make a total of spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear up to small. And let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the awl in one of the two corners where the kernel is, and then peel it all.
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all the wool thread fine, and wipe the blood, and make air-dry the superfluity of the hairs above the two eyebrows to any sticky things, if you wish to do this.
and if this is not so, if you have no care, then leave the stitch and the hairs until three days or four.
then cure the wound without stitch of drying and constricting things, because the paper revives to the adhesion of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear. and if by another manner:
and if by another manner: and that you draw the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three ounces wide according to the shape that is here.
Then cut what rises over the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you lack the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or one with thread, and put it in the middle of the figure. And put the other thread beside the large tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between the two threads equally;
Then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over what you have marked, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cress and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted.
so it is necessary that you use what we have said of the incision;
but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of wounds is according to this form: and that you would convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make two ligatures by art, and two subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut as two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble the one and the other subtly above what surmounts the paper of the eye, and restrain the two ligatures from the two parts formed; and let it so for several days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and carry itself, until it comes away by itself.
If he is late, if he does it with force, then treat him until he is healed.
And when the wound is soldered, and if the paper has been lifted, and they will no longer prick hairs;
And this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
The work is such that you prick a subtle needle, and it puts the silk thread soft and subtle; Then assemble the jaws and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long.
Then arrange in the chase the other thread of silk briefly, and tie the chief of the two threads.
Then put the patient's head on your own healthy one.
And be facing the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and small work. Then put the needle into all the chase in the root of the hair near it, and make it pierce through the paper carefully as long as you pull it above the natural hair;
Then pull out the hair up to the root, and put it back into the wound if there are one or two or three or more.
Then pull your hand until the hairs come out of the entire wound on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the wound away from its bottom all along the line that you have arranged, until the wound comes out of the hole above and you see it with your eyes.
Therefore if you treat the wound and thread it, and close the eye and let it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and flesh grows above.
And if the hairs are small, accompany them with long hairs of natural wool, and let it be lifted along with it, until they grow longer, and then lift it.
Of the rot of the eye When this disease called 'aleacrati' or the rot comes to the eye, there are two ways it appears.
One natural, and one unnatural.
And it happens through sudden wounds, or incisions, or cauteries, and similar things.
And the way to treat it is that you split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside a linen pad, and tie it until it is healed.
and it is not proper that you use in the cure of them things that dry and restrict For if you do this, then the illness returns worse than the first.
but work with softening things, such as fennel; and the rose of water or aloe and linseed seeds be cooked, and diacoylon ointment melted in any oil, and enclose a tent, and treat with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before;
and these works that we have said are nothing but treatments of this illness so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
This illness which is called 'axacrati', and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wound and split and cautery and similar things;
And the way of the work in it is that you prick a needle, in which it has the double thread, and you put it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the thread comes into the two shoulders of the flesh;
Then having the flesh above to the whole needle, and the cut to the spatula wide. And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is fitting, it is good;
If those are not, then take the scraper and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits or cuts inside the paper;
And let the shoulders of the two splits be the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and be made angles so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has the name « I greiche»;
Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that his ribs are raised and out of place, from what follows on the paper, then adjust the two separated parts, and stitch them with a thread of wool.
Then treat it with those that we have said about softening medicines, and dressings, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; Then insert between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said.
Then insert between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said. And one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it does return the figure to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is convenient for work and instruments in many dispositions.
When this soldering happens to men's hands in such a way that the paper above is glued with egg white, and cannot move or do its natural works, then you must put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up.
and the extent of pinches, as long as you cut what is stuck to the spatula carefully, which should not be too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too thick and blinds the eye.
and let your incision be, with which you scrape the assembled one, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form.
and it is healed all of that assembled, and do not at any time in the salty eye water, and the lifting of fresh water, and of collyrium.
then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put over the eye wool moistened in honey; and after the third day use the collar and things inside until it is healed.
Know that the angle is according to II manners: it is nervous and similar to the hard silk fabric, and another which is not at all nervous, but is similar to white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one burns it, it cannot be done.
and both appearances begin towards the large tear duct, and cross a little here and there until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then he opens his eyes. and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as the pliers of small pleats, and it upward. then take a needle, and put upon it hair of horse, or of ox, or of cow, and the thread strong; and double the point of the needle a bit and insert it into the angle, and pierce it through with the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and bring it upward, and sear all the hair along the side of the angle which follows the small muscle and silk to the hair until the head, then cut away the remaining part at the root of the tear throughout the whole spatula finely and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear so that through the incision does not come the body of tears commonly.
and no time is the angle extended solely to the thread as we have said. after the scraping one has all the spathe of what this form is:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the pricked point is not pierced.
and after the incision put in the eye a bit of ground flaxseed, and from the collar made of lead, and let it until the other day. then cure that which is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines.
and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form And raise the finger carefully above it, and if you see that it does not lessen and the pain increases, then distill from your mouth into the eye a colure made of litarge and red colure and finely ground sel, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess, then apply poultice, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh near the tear duct harms the eye due to great annoyance, then suspend it with a small hook and cut off a part, but not too much, so that no tear comes out;
Then distill in the oil collyrium red which is made of lead ore.
The eyes of some men are born sometimes red charcoal, and covers the iris and rests on the eyelids and turns them to the fire, and seems like a rose of balance.
and the work is that the patient puts his head in a sound place, then the worker opens the eyes, and coils all that charcoal with suitable tweezers to those, and sustains it with strength.
then cut the first charcoal, and go on cutting all the way to the end, and be careful that you do not blind the eye during the work.
and let the incision be of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the corner and to the small forces of which one removes the white part, as how the form after this chapter it demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then use the oil of garlic crushed or you distill red cochineal and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top the oil with cotton wool mixed with a bit of egg white, so that it is sure to form a hot abscess;
and if it does not remain there, and the skin surrounds it, and you doubt about the hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess.
then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until the flesh is set in the oil by this method.
But nonetheless, it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weak oil to the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
Several are veins red that are covered on the eye, and they take from sight their work and weaken the eye every days.
It is therefore necessary that you first look at if the eye, in which it is, and apart from, and there is no other malady besides only the seb then you apply in this manner:
instruct the patient that he put his head in your healthy one, then suspend those veins to the whole body according to his wisdom, and let the threads be subtle double according to this form:
And let two threads by degrees in the body according to this form:
then you wind tightly those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins outside of the eye;
and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut any other veins
and when you will have done this, distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt that which remains of the scab.
And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, do a poultice on the eye with things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is appeased and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The mirror is called “arissati” fistula:
When you cure it with cautery and with a burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut into the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of which this form is made.
and it is called "sharp head", and it is made of fire iron to the head's front, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is reset.
and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medicines.
if the parts are soldered together, and flesh grows there, and the body of the bone is soldered, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew or become inflamed, and no bad accident comes to it, know that it is healed;
If this is not the case, if there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the wound according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forest according to this form, and let the shoulder be of iron in three angles, and let the shaft be thinned up to the chief as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes into his in this way if he holds his hand on his forehead;
and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows back and hardens the union, it will go to the forehead; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open throughout all and they do not come to trouble to the nose, nor diminish, then it is necessary that you bind the patient.
Then cleanse, then place a suction cup or haverel without wounding to suck, then put upon the eye a liniment made of wool and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then restrain the eye, and emplaster it above with bandages and cloths.
And the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and double each one in IV, and then put one upon another according to the quantity that the eye has need.
Then restrain from above with a hard bandage, and begin again the suction cups to suck without wounding;
Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye restrained day and night, and if the liniment softens, then it is necessary that you restrain it much.
Then bone the join after the day and the nut, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good.
If this no; Then begin again the poultice and bandages and the bone and the leeches until it is healed.
of the unfolding of woolen cloth When disruption comes in the woolen cloth, then open it, and there come forth pieces like the grain of resin, and is esperatable to see;
then if you see it cover, the work is such that you thrust a needle in the root of the lower part until the top, then thrust another needle where there is the double thread from the lacrymal; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
then cut the place of the double thread and tie a part of the wool around, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put upon the other eye half in an abundance of egg;
and let it remain until the child falls with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
and at no time should the wound be restricted by the grape on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye shows a great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes out from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eye, and enter it immediately.
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bow that is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water.
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the bow coming up to your eyes; then be careful, and do not let it descend and become disordered the light, and let the patient see things as he used to;
and if it does not descend from below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not apparent as we have said
if you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and feel on the cornea where it joins with the conjunctiva and the crown, as long as the bowel protrudes;
and when it is protruded, instill in the eye hot sharp water mixed with honey, or sharp water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye We have shown the appearances of the waters in their division, and what it is necessary for to consider. if in work according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, facing away from the sun, and tie the healthy eye and hold it very tightly.
then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right;
then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eyes are right;
then put the point of the instrument beside the crown by the width of a finger in that white part of the eye to the side of the tear duct, then push the instrument which is called 'almagda' skillfully, and thrust your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing;
and it is fitting that the measure of the almagda's path be at the midpoint of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the crown of the eye;
If you see the bone in this paper for the clarity of the corneal veil, and then place the instrument up to there where the water is, then express it below one way after another.
If the water descends now, if the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rests the little one, and if the water ascends the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and she does not ascend, gently withdraw algada rotating your hand  poco a poco.
and then put back in water a little of silk gum, and leave that eye inside. Then put outside the eye plugged with wool or cloth soaked in rose oil and honey, and tie it with the healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our kind, put on a mixture above with an abundance of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit," which has this form:
And pierce thus only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep in, but make it subtle, then put almond as we have said.
And at the completion of the work, equip the patient with a poultice beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
And be free from all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day.
Then he unties him in this very dark house, and tests his sight, and makes him see some things, and then he puts the bandage back on until the seventh day.
And it is not good that you do these things in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you apply this, because the water rises hastily.
If abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the dressing of this which soothes the abscess.
And when it is soothed, then untie the sight and put upon his face the little rim to cover for any day, and be again in that dark house.
And then he leaves the house little by little, and becomes again in his state;
And know that none of disciples should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they did alchemy with almonds, to which they added water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients. And perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the shapes of almonds, for those who do not know them see them.
and they are of grain properly: And let the chief be like a bird's head of this same subtlety, and the last one in three sharp angles.
At no time do roots of wood grow together in different ways, for that reason there are none which seem like scorpions with many feet;
and if there are such ones where the wood is cracked of bad color, and if the wood has a good color. In that kind of wound which is sore, and not gaping, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that kind of wound which is sore, and not gaping, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the onion on that wound, and the fumes; then carefully take with a sharp and subtle spatula what you can sustain to it until you know that the wound is all cleaned
And if anything remains which cannot be taken, then open it with all the sharp and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if there is a boil or abscess, apply a poultice as it is proper;
And if it is malignant boils, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is seared and all the wounds are removed, then pour on either hot water or wine. If the nose works, and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is sound.
And if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut.
Therefore, it is necessary that you put a thread of linen slightly thick into it, and let it be tied with our hands, and have between each knot space  one or less; and put the patient's shoulder into the wool in his hand and pull it out smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth;
and many times do children like this at school, and it is easy for him who wants to do it;
then hold the head which comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head which comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart carefully as we who are wool;
Do this until you know that the nose has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the wool, wipe the blood, and moisten the wool in Egyptian ointment, and put it back straight into the nostril as before;
do this three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of flesh;
and then place on it a bandage of wool for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, with which one distills oils and medicines onto it:
And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a funnel, and the lead similarly.
and if you see fit, make a closed funnel, and let the instruments be full for purging the head;
and have a handle to hold the head when one heats the oil or any liquid.
from that it draws onto the skin
Many times on the head appears a disease called "tellum," and it grows and becomes very large, so much that it is a terrible sight to behold;
and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and the bone all out, then put on its place the cautery or the ardent medicine;
and if one delays to cut it until it is large, then take ward if it is hard, of dull color, of poor feeling;
if one does not touch it with iron because it is an ulcerated abscess, for when one cuts it any time, much evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not dull in color, and you see that one can completely cut it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these work-like cartridges, it profits little, for in no humans.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, first see if the wound is fresh with all its blood. And then join the two lips together with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their core until they bleed, then join the two lips together with a suture, and restrain them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood, and ground incense. And put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly. or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In men's hands  happen inside the lips abscesses hard, seeming like grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
Therefore it behooves you to turn the lips, and split open each knot, and take them with tweezers and cut them in every part;
then put on their place after the incision of powdered vitriol, as long as the blood is stopped;
and then let it heal itself, and cure its place with dry things until it is healed.
Many times  flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
so it behooves you to support it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and leave the blood to clot
then put on the place vitriol ground, or other powders restraining and drying;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which happens many times, then cauterize it a second time; if it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they are assembled to the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sores which are ugly and rough. and sometimes they are [the] tooth black and yellow and towards (a direction), as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and they are the tooth stinking.
so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his chin be in your saint (a term of respect), and raise [or open] the teeth or sores as much as possible until nothing remains. And thus do of blackness and greenishness, and jaundice and other spots, as long as they are mottled;
and if one removes those that are at the first layer, it is good; If not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all removed;
and know that the teeth have need of diverse kinds of instruments for removing them, according to what the work shows, because the rasp used to remove outside teeth has other forms than the one used to remove between the teeth; And these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to draw out as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; for it is a most high substance until on's has no excuse for failing to draw it out.
Therefore when the patient is constrained to drink milk, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is a toothache, and drinks milk from the healthy tooth. And nevertheless the pain does not depart for this, as long as the evil is present, because we have already seen it happen to our patients.
And when you are well certain of the tooth aching, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth entirely. A spatula strong to ward off the gum on all sides;
then move it with your two tweezers or delicate pincers at the first pock and pock, until it is well loosened, then firmly affirm the tweezers. And let the shoulder of the patient be in your holy between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extract the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out freely, then take any of these instruments and put it inside each side lightly, and move it as you did at first.
And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, then it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with pliers, so that it does not break when extracting.
And it is necessary to work very carefully around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
And be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness break sometimes the chariot, and do not bring it to what we have recounted;
but bring sometimes by the incision of those great sickness from the roots that remain, or because of the chariot that they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt.
And if bleeding occurs, as often happens, apply a powder of vitriol to the place.
And if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, as to how one pulls teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth;
and these are the forms: And let them be large limbs so that they do not bend when working, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold tight.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the working area, it is necessary that you put on top of it moistened cotton in butter every day or two, until the bone is softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri," so that the bone seems like a beak when it is handled.
and inside they are made like a file, and this is its form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali," which is to say a chisel, so this is its form:
And it should be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through those, it is good.
If those do not, with the help of all your instruments, of which the forms come after here:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two reins, of which this is the form: and other instruments that are before in the fashion of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like great pliers, of which here is the form:
And let this instrument be thick so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are. and also other instruments, which are not counted.
And the wise masters subtle ones find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such maladies where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others, and if one breaks not the cartilage or other bones, or it hurts, then he seeks the instruments that are proper, which I have told you, and help with gestures, of which here is the form:
And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone so it does not escape, but that it can be held and removed.
And then restore the place with suitable medicine for those, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the shape is ugly, and even in virgins, then it behooves you to know if the teeth are born after the teeth and are not in their right place, and one cannot file them or smooth them:
Therefore the filing; And if it is joined with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and it is similar to a small beak, and be of sharp iron at its summit:
And the cope peck and peck in hands daily for the hardness of the tooth, and for those that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then use a type of file as here is its form:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles;
and in filing a tooth bit by bit in hands lightly, so that it does not move until it chips;
then the filing at the end to absolutely nothing, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When a front tooth aches, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on it when he chews without pain, and you have cured them with restraining medicines, and this is of no use;
then it is necessary to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver wire turns green and spoils, but gold never changes.
and let the thread be medium neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
and if you see the teeth crowded together, then take the thread and bring it doubled between the two sound teeth, then put the chiasmus between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you come skillfully to the sound tooth on the other side. then begin the covering again up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and skillfully, until it does not move at all.
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the chiasmus of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and place them between the sound tooth, and put it so that it does not bleed the tongue.
and then leave it thus tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the threads slip, then restrain it with another thread.
If it stays and serves thus throughout its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls, then it is put back in its place, one by one, as we have said;
and no one should interfere who is not skilled and experienced, and sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from bleached bone, and it is put in the place where there is a deficiency, and it is restrained as we have said, and it stays and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes this root which comes under the tongue or naturally; or by accident of a wound soldered
and the works are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue;
then cut the nerve of the tongue, as long as the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there is hardness or numbness, and this is a sign of injury, then put the probe and cut in the wide area that ligament.
and keep that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath;
and when you have done it, raise the head and neck of the patient with a sponge or a cloth of water and cold, then put under the tongue a tent of linen.
and the bandage the patient each night, so that the wound cannot close.
And if bleeding occurs, put on top of the area powdered vitriol; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize it with the sluggish cautery, which is good for this. then treat it with another treatment until it is healed,
and if you see it of a reddish or black color or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, because it is an ulcer;
and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then apply the sponge, and scrape it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on both sides; and if the wound does not heal to your work, then put on powdered vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work as long as you extract everything thoroughly;
then raise the level of ash and soil, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Of abscesses of the throat Sometimes inside the throat come boils that are called “godaths,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
If they are hard abscesses of small size and dusky color, do not touch them with iron at all.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron at all, nor for the bleeding. but leave it until it is rotten, and then you will break it open, or it would burst by itself;
and if it is of white color and the root is subtle, then have prepared the instrument to cut, but first look whether the abscess feels warm and is appeased.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hands, and open the mouth and place the instrument between his fingers, and press the tongue down with all of the instrument.
and be of silver or iron fine as well as a knife:
Cannot you press the tongue to all these instruments, and you see the abscess, if you take the needle and place it into the marrow, and drive it upwards more than you can.
and do not draw anything from the tissues with it, then cover the instrument from this, which is the form that seems like a force. and nonetheless the head is curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or tin.
And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs for this is the form: And be sharpened on one side, and blunt on the other.
And when you have cut one of the marrow, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and plain water, and if the evacuation of blood occurs, gargle the patient with water, or decoctions of pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding is stopped. then heal until he is sound
and no times are abscesses born in the throat other than the two tonsils, so cut them thus as the two tonsils equally.
And I medicined a woman of an abscess that she had born inside the throat, that is to say the abscess of small size;
and had I well nearly closed the whole throat so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was stopped, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained thus one or two days.
And the abscess was so high raised that it had been driven into two furrows by its two openings.
I hastened then, and put in one the incision, then drew forth the pus and a great portion of bowels;
then made another incision in the other opening of the two, and opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue;
after having drained the abscess with these poultices, and having cauterized a part of it, And thus was unplugged the conduit of the throat in the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at that abscess for a long time;
And the abscess grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
Then I closed it and cauterized it inside the throat; Thus it remained without growing;
and I departed from those parts, and only God did what came after me.
of the grape
When the grape is ripe and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is smaller and round, then it is called "grape".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the head of the abscess is appeased, and it is thin, then you must cut it;
and that which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of a rusty color or black, so it is necessary that you make the incision into it. For there is great peril upon the patient.
It therefore behooves, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and of its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention above. Then insert the awl into the uva, and treat it with vinegar, and cut to the II instruments that I have said in the incision of the II almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit;
because if you cut more, it harms the voice and speech;
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of being cut, you should use an instrument to cauterize the senses that cause fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. And it is that the patient places his head on your healthy side, and then presses his tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and confides with very sharp water so that it is not too thick nor too light; And in employ the head of this instrument, for this is its form:
And have or take a hair or on which one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the grape;
and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscles move from his mouth to the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the fleece;
then hold your hand to all the medicine and press on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it turn red and the bites of the medicine are calmed;
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it on any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton dries on the grape;
and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and fall after IV or V days.
And if you need to begin the fire cautery of medicine again, restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
And be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision.
If it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamine and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and put some water in it, and let it boil;
And the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and on top of the pot have the instrument prepared according to this manner: And be it of silver or of iron, and let one of the shoulder blades be put in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the vein, until the eye is dead.
After the eye begins again, until it dries out, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, because many things happen. And make not this further than at the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a vein and put inside the head a piece of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat. Because the egg white does not let the vapor burn the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether.
Many times it has been applied to the throat bone or spine of fish, or any thing.
Therefore it is necessary that you draw what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all your instrument, so that you see move the thing.
And what does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps if the thing is thrown out by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie it to the sponge, and then swallow it; And when it arrives at the place, it will swell, and then you will draw further.
And if it does not come further than what we have said, take the instrument of plank according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter the throat, and have the head held high. And guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that the whole does not close up, nor push inside the bone.
And it is better that the patient themselves pushes the instrument, because they know where the thing is hard. If he pushes down, or he draws it outwards with all of the instrument evenly, until it is fully out.
of the cutting of the throat
No time is a remedy for the wound, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; And when those do not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
And if you see the wound, treat it with all little forceps, or subtle pincers that are suitable for this.
And if that does not work, take a dog's hair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put fire at the end of the dog's hair, and do this often. And if the patient stands of water all day.
Then take full a glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and put it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often. And as soon as the patient feels the water, he will spit.
And if she does not spit as we have said, then fume the patient with asafoetida, to the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the grape;
Do this many times, for it will purge without vomiting.
And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are burning coals, and let the bottom be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that put the head of the instrument;
Then put your fumigation in, and the patient puts the head of the pipe into his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the palate.
And the bloodletting will now come forth, and if it does not flow, then begin fumigation again many times.
And let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and drink no water;
And thus it is necessary that she be cured by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats bloodletting is, when it can be seen, similar to bent pliers for entering into the throat. And it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has the sharpness of a file, so that whoever takes it, they cannot let go.
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those who remember afterwards in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size.
and this is in two manners one of which is in its own likeness, and from that which it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the limbs where they are in the body.
For the abscess of the head is different from that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses should not be pierced until the boil is ripe according to its completion;
and if to such ones it is necessary to pierce when they are mature and do not ripen according to their completion, like abscesses which are near the joints.
For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it be as long as it is rotten, by chance the ligaments and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is a cause of contraction in that limb.
Or if the abscess is near the principal member and if you delay the piercing until it ripens, it will harm the principal member;
or if it is near the foundation, pierce it thus when it is ripe;
And it is not appropriate that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion, except for the one close to its base, so that it may not be further inflamed and become elongated inside, and there comes a fistula. and may not heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is done according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the loosening and softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
And it is necessary that you make the perforation where it depends more from the abscess, and where it opens freely.
and let the perforation be long and in the middle of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where it has no flexion. In those that are dislocated, according to the member.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the puncture open as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, then the body of the worm will be lengthened from it, and it is full of much filth. and by chance harden the lips and deepen it.
And if to any abscess which are perceived according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members have need.
And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if it has such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the heart and cover it; When it has become like a curtain, and is deadened, then it is necessary to do as one does with boils;
and if it has such ones that are cut into three angles, and if it has such ones which one covers like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of anger;
and if it has such or one makes a round incision, and other incisions and seeming cutting.
Those who have no head, as if it were a superficial abscess, you must pierce it fully;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and it has become swollen greatly, and you pierce it, if do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a portion. then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing from it directly; do this many times, large to small, until all the pus is gone;
Likewise if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman carrying, or a young child, or an old man decrepit. For the spirit sometimes bursts forth with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you are not worried about it.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; And if it is a flat incision, administer pads of linen or old cotton; And if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you must put a pad in each one so that they come against each other;
And if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and have sewn it together, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint scraped from linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then the abscess will heal and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the flow of blood happens in your work, so administer cold water and ease it, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times.
And if the bleeding persists, administer governance and treatment, and the powders that I have said in this book. And if it is during winter, and the part or the abscess is very nervous, then you must put on pads and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil;
And if it is in this state and the parts are fleshy, then it is necessary that you place above them soft cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cooled oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then untie the abscess and wipe it and treat it, as is proper, until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
as I have told you how one should go before the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
Where boils on the head come small abscesses, and they are manners of ours that are in cloths, as the joiner of a hinge, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and such that they have moisture as well as boils;
and if there are some that are hard and stony in their size, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary to it.
And the works of the hip are such that you should consider all instruments which are called "entromissoire," because their form comes here afterwards, what they contain.
For if it contains moisture, so lift it from above with a long stick.
And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape without leaving the hair that contains that moisture, because it returns again when one leaves it alone;
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day. and cover those who remain from the dampness.
And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not remain damp.
then treat the wound with ointment as convenient, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds in fatty tissue, cut it according to this form, of length; and insert your probes and its lining from all sides, and put all your care into draining the pus where it lies.
and if the artery does contrary, then do what I have told you after.
And also do so for the abscess if it is purulent, and with cutting and caring as I have told you.
And the cutting above the purulent abscess and the moist one is lighter because they are of little blood. And if to some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of those which had abscesses that I opened or chiefs of an old woman;
and found the abscess also like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had done any of it, they would have made the wound as well as with a stone.
In other abscesses or chiefs, it was that those which come at the chiefs of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that mucus flows out.
and the cure as it is proper.
Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come in other parts or of the body, and are bad, and are joined together with each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its fold, like the pustule and abscess of the chief, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrophules are many.
and the resemblances of these scrophules are many. There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.
in which therefore you see good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side and is not at all sore to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the duct, and is not very deep.
if it is proper that you cut it from above, and the skin is removed from each side, and the two lips of the heart are brought together with sutures, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
and treat it point by point, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let it not be scraped too much or too deeply, so that your hands escape, and do not see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powder that stops blood, and hold the wound. And leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work, until you have completed it;
Then if there remain any small pustules, cut them and remove them with your finger.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is not necessary to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread and let it hang, without harming.
Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then that there is no longer any superfluity for the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk the juice, and the count as we have said.
If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk the juice, and the count as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more.
and pierce it thus as that said before, in dependence, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleansed, then the ointment cure  preventing flesh, until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and it is the scripture of their word.
For those who have squint-eyes, it is fitting that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be cut. And one does not make help by those, because all the veins and the passages of the sick are to those who have abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the almonds.
When the patient is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three circles or four a small slit through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage.
And those who are so cuttable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to the whole incision, then cut the keel until it comes to the channel; and shun the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the mucus of the channel that flows out from the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open a while.
And when the hour has passed from which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound near the heart, and sew them entirely together, except for the cartilage.
then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the lung. Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
And for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the sickness is passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and care for it, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took the knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
and I was called for the healer, and I found him as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and knew well that it had not been cut vein nor led forward except to the throat, and the veins flowed through the wound.
I hastened, and so I bandaged the wound, and cured it until it was healed;
and there came to the lady nothing but that she was hoarse of voice, and returned after to her disposition;
for because of this I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.
This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is much in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental.
In the natural one there is no engine.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. And if there is fear, it does not suit to work to do more than in the one that is small, and prove and search all around the introducer: If you find it as our fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as we cut the ours, and the trail at all its top, if there is one. And enclose well then, and cure it as it suits, until it be perfectly healed.
Many manners of ours there are, which I will say all the appearances of;
And now it suits that I say all the difference that is between our and exit.
I say that exit is sometimes feverish holding, until the boiling has passed, and is accomplished the rotting; Therefore rests the fever and the heat.
With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a fluid, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large.
And they are according to their appearances, whether gray or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of this disease that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument that is called "entromissore," according to what its form will be or chapter which is after.
And the manner of incising abscesses as we do is that you prick or moisten them more than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the interpositor, and take care in those that jump out.
If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, do it as I have said of other abscesses;
And if after the introduction moisture comes, know that it is fat, therefore make it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and gently scrape it on each side and guard the coat where it lies so you draw it healthy with the new.
And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times.
And if some remains and the wound grieves you, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and strain the wound, and put above soothing things, a hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the abscess is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and cure it from that which generates flesh.
and if the vein opening is contrary to you or otherwise hurry and use the place of powdered vitriol, and let it lie for two days or three, as long as the wound suppurates, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cover what remains from outside.
See here the forms of the  in-introducing instruments, and they are in three ways: large and medium and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways of them: large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like needles with which one sews the sores, and they are of citrine iron, or iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are more valuable, and they are more proven from black plumbum to enclose the curves of fistula;
and are of III ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the openings.
The forms of the incisions are of many resemblances, as you see here:
and if incisions which have II curves of III ways also;
and if incisions which have III curves, and are also of III ways;
and if incisions which have II curves, and incisions of one curve only, and are of III ways;
and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these which one makes are trenching, and there are some which do not cut further than one part, which we scrape the veins with, for that reason one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
and of these introitors are the lancets put back in handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses;
and they are of three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one should only use them in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar parts;
and never is another instrument small, resembling the peelings of fists, according to this form, for which one leeches blood; and place it once in its place that is suitable for cutting veins and arteries, and never return according to this great form.
Never do they swell the breasts of some men when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like a woman's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should be according to this form of this line b. to g.; then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
and if the mamacle leans downward, and is softened by its size like it does with women, then make two incisions above, in two similar slits. so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.. then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and those things that are necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, for the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, then it behooves you to fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and let it so until it mends the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are types of hard scrofulas which have ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then use the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment afterwards to it as long as it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of a scrofula, then make it as we have said in incisions of scrofulas, and if the wound is rent inwards, then administer cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut and the skin above it is sewn together, many times abscesses come about, and this also happens to the vein that has been inflamed and abscessed.
and if you know this is because of the artery, then the abscess will be long and spread out; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel its pulling.
and when this is because of the vein, it appears red and swollen from without.
and it is folly to cover this abscess, even when it is under the armpits and elbows and neck and in many other places, and is very large. Therefore it is necessary to use the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge should also use it, and in those who are inflamed by an artery that is cut from above the skin long;
then work the waist with quick movements, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in II lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in the temples;
then point the place which is between the two ties with an introducer as long as the blood that is there issues forth, and let it be clean the abscess;
then administer the cure that injures the bow, until the tie hangs; then cure those with ointment coming up to them, as long as they are healed;
and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand those that you can from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be the double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; Then tie up the abscess, as I have told you, or join one of its parts to the two shoulders with a thread;
And if you doubt that the thread is not far enough, then reinsert another needle through all the thread under the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then cut open the abscess until the superfluities are out, then cut away the superfluity of the kernel and leave what is tied.
Then put on a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
As abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips, and in all their joints where there are abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and is more disposed without pain;
and when it is forcibly restrained, the patient feels pain, and it is not felt throughout the body, but beneath the heart;
and it moves well in every direction, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: for chance, he might go into a contraction; and the one who is at the top or on the forehead, it feels the skin to the spatula.
and the one who is at the top or on the forehead, it feels the skin to the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, suspend it with a thread and remove the skin, then clean it out and suture the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its appearance, and the root is subtle, and the head large;
and there are some small ones and very large ones;
and I saw the man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were cracked open, and pus oozed out of them.
I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI ⅓, and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the article is white and moist and with a fine root; if it cut with a wide spatula, and be in your presence the fire cautery.
if it cut with a wide spatula, and be in your presence the fire cautery. For at the cutting comes many times too great bleeding, and if the blood does not stop well, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a thread of silk well made, and tie the articulation as we have said, and let him leave it for days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the silk thread as long as it holds the articulation, and heal by means of it without labor;
and if the roots are large, then fear to cut it even for the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return;
then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the flesh which is of a yellow color and poor without blood and milky appearance.
For it is an abscess which has broken open, and I will come to its treatment after this.
when the wound has healed If the appearance of the swelling comes from a cautery of wound or fissure of the syphons, and is on the belly and in some of the swellings as they have in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or of windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the sheath and by the opening of the bulb, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from different exits. And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two ends it rises up, and then returns, and by chance it may be tight, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for great work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it at all;
And if it is due to blood, then it opens by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and is filled according to a quantity; And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you observe whether its appearance is for the blood of an artery, or of a vein, or windiness.
And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you observe whether its appearance is for the blood of an artery, or of a vein, or windiness. So you must let the care. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bulb, then you must order the patient to keep his arm straight, and be stretched all straight, then reign in everything around the belly; then command him to gently hold between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with the spatula, then bring half of the abscess above to the whole great incision; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let it be held in place by the linen band.
then work on the half of the abscess extended on the linen, and put your index finger in, and search for the intestine. If you find it caught by the linen, untie it, and bring the intestine to the outside of the belly;
and if you find the boil, take it with the incision, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you make it pierce.
Then strain the abscess in IV places above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave their place until it rots, and the dead flesh falls off by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then cure it as it should be, and treat the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then cure it as it should be, and treat the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it is right, and close the place.
Of the ulcer We have said in the division the appearances of sores, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment of iron.
and let us say the sore arises in the marsh, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and ancients have said that when a sore is in a place where one can scrape it like a sore which is in the nipples, and in the buttock, and in similar places, and it should be entirely removed when it is at its beginning;
no one has ever healed it before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black coles.
then let him heal if there is a manifest fullness, then make the patient healthy again in place to do the work;
then throw your incisions or ulcers, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow out completely, and firmly press the place with your hand or anything, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the blood is extinguished. then the cure of other cures until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one must not touch with iron in these II resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and hypoarche, because it is a mortal thing;
therefore when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy which is called "eclitse" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as a cough and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt.
And if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and is neither too young nor too old, then do this work. Raise the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the pelvis, then take the spine spatula according to this form: And be cut from two parts. At its point, and altogether it should not be so deeply inserted that it can come to the intestine when one inserts it, and do not let it pierce.
Then look if the dropsy is in its place towards the intestines: If it is necessary that you cut above the bud, III does right below the armpit. And if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the left side of the bud III does.
And if it is because of the moisture, let it be on the right side, and it is not appropriate that the patient lie on the split so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place;
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it out, and raise your hand to the whole spatula between the skin and the sifac as much as when you are scraping at the quantity of a nail or inquirin.
Then pierce the sifac until the spatula comes to the place where it should be, and this is the place of the water, then push the water out, and put this instrument back as much as this. And it resembles a fine silver chain, and is of iron or archaut lighter, and has in the lower part a small hole. and on costs one side, III holes. And II of one side, and I of the other;
And the head is cut as a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feather with:
At the top is the alemale, so that when the instruments come to the point, it descends now onto the instrument.
Empty therefore half or the third part, for if you empty more than is proper in this hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death.
But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the disposition of the virtue of the patient signifies, and his pulses;
Then treat the instrument and retain the point, and it is retained now by the heart which stops the hole that is on the syfac, for this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner.
Then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering these things, and treat with water a small quantity.
Do this no day, and keep from heating until it remains but a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you give him much water, then treat with burying or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and it will get better. And treat with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
No time is born a child who has no opening in the shaft, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary, he must immediately discern with great care the entire spatula according to this form:
Then put or pierce the subtle cloth of plank, and tie it and keep it so for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, then be removed the clot, and do pee, and then put it back.
and perhaps this is not necessary, because the urine coming forth does not let it close.
He whose wound is small, so are medicated with the balm of plantain, as we have said, and it will widen.
Those who do not have the prepuce in its place are pale, because none are born with the prepuce at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before pulling their penis upward; and cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the end, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies often on his back, and the head of the penis and the scrotum are lifted like a feather so that the prepuce falls in the middle as it should.
And take care of blood loss which comes often, and if it happens, then the person who is skilled in staunching blood should treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times this ailment comes to the shaft, and is an appearance of ugly flesh.
and in it there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
so it behooves you to prick them with a fine needle, and scrape and clean them all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment. then cure it with Diaphynicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color and discharge, then you must bring it a cautery.
When you have scraped it, and if the ailment is in the body of the shaft, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the ailment which is inside first. and when it is healed, then its cure defer.
For when you treat it together, make sure the head of the bone is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its shank and groin.
then it is necessary to shave away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the rind of quince and verbena, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery helps with two arrangements together: that is to say, for the removal of blood, and for corruption.
and if the head of the bone is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put or drive a chain of lead into the bone, and piss the patient's urine upon it.
And when the skin is raw at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or where there is an ulcer or abscess, then it behooves you to scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the cords are loosened, and the tip of the penis is free on all sides;
And if it is a grievous thing to speak of these, then it behooves you to scrape it with a spatula, little by little, at the head of the penis and the skin;
then gently separate them, and put in between them a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water, so that it does not become raw again;
Circumcision is not the same as other wounds; Nevertheless, when we do this work of our will, and properly to children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most gentle for healing.
I say that the ancients did not say circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have more than what we have acquired by experiment.
For I have wanted the greatest part of masters and healers who performed circumcisions in Dal, and with force, and with a whole knife.
If they were to cut the foreskin because there are two layers, and by chance one is cut above and the other below stays. Or it must be cut again, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is called Dal, the tip of the member is not well ensured.
And in the purification of the anus, by chance the fire escapes, and the work runs away, and many times they are born so that they don't need purification, and I have wanted it.
Of the modification that is done with force to the whole line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, they are equal in length throughout the whole soul tenses. But that the child should be well enclosed within the skin;
And be the manner of the first work as this is that you make think the child, if he understands, that you do not to him force only to tie the thread around the rod so only, and then do make him rejoice in all the manners that you can;
Then do make him stay between your hands straight, and return the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
Then thrust your hand to the rod and blow or heart, and the drive in up as long as the head of the rod be in; Then purify it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie under one pock to the other lien;
Then purify it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie under one pock to the other lien; And hold it as II dues by the second lieeure to the pouch and to the index, and cut between the II liens, then lift the head upwards gently and drive the head of the rod; then let the blood run drop by drop, for it is the cure. and put powder on and over the powder I drape it with a cloth of a boiled egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with rosemary oil good and fresh, and let it remain until the next day, and treat it with another treatment as long as it is healthy.
The form of the forces in the clarification is this:
the two shoulders should be held and should be sharp, and the shoulders also as large as the hand equally:
The error of the clarification is when the cores inside are at the incision;
Therefore it behooves you to extend it to your fingernail so that the pus makes an abscess;
and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tongs, and then cut it.
And if they exceed three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, let him leave it as long as the abscess chafes is appeased, and scar lightly.
If you cut it as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore cure the place of things sound wound with powder, that we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut too much of the heart, and it goes upwards, it will not harm.
Therefore cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is of a stone's lodging, or of blood congealed, or of a bowel, or of fatty flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in its location or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees. and let the feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can. and therefore the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released and;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction to it with all the instrument that is called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and be of silver subtly light feathered like the feather of a bird; and be the handle a palm long and a half, and be subtle at the head.
And the manner of the issuing of the urine is that you take the doubled thread and tie it at the head a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut the excess of the wool and put it to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards toward the head;
then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it come to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because of who leads or where it goes is twisted.
then extend the thread throughout all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and wash the urine;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
When scabs or blood come in the bladder, or there is rot gathered, and you see it distilled with sharp and medicaments, so do it to all the instrument which is called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has III openings: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the legs are covered so that the medication is such that it well stops the penis without addition, if one can suck out the moisture, and push when necessary;
and when you see fit to place your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and treat with the thread that is inside.
if you will draw the moisture to the catheter, and then firmly reinsert the thread inside. then the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one cleanses the bladder:
And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
and below to the groin where the connection falls.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you wish to cleanse the bladder inside it, then tie it between the two breasts using a thick doubled cord, and warm the moistened bag over the fire.
Then put the tip of the clyster into the rectum, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make it a circle, and pierce it roundly within. Then put the strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dial, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have just said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
And we have said the difference between stones engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety;
and I open the harene, and it tightens the patient's penis, and it pains him many times, and then it disappears. and with many of these leaps its foundations;
and it is light the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is as the middle to those who are between youth and old age;
and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate them and move them downward, so that the hip descends to the level of the bladder, and it comes away from its high position sometimes.
Then make him sit between your hands supported, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downward.
Then grasp it and touch it inside.
If you feel the hip in that space, then hasten now to cut above the hip.
And if it does not fall upon touching at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult who has completed puberty. and shove it in its foundation, and grasp the hip, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it at the neck of the bladder;
then press upon your loin, and put it out at the fire where you wish to cut.
And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where one makes the cut;
then he puts in the spatula cutting, of which this is the form: And make between that which is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh;
and be straight above the stone, and your loins be close or foundation, and let the cut be transverse so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the pressure if the loins which is or foundation, that it leaps outwards without work;
And know that there are such stones which have angles, and margins: If they are broken to be removed;
and if there is one that is soft, appearing like a gland, and rounded, whose exit is light.
To those then which have angles and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not come out, then it behooves you to extract it with tweezers that are also like a file at the top, so as to squeeze the stone until it does not escape. or you put underneath the instrument subtle and curved at the top;
and if you cannot manage it thus, then enlarge I the opening, and if the blood does not come, strain with vinegar.
and if there are more than one stone, first push the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the tract, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are more.
And if it is very large, it must be stitched up, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the way the wound cannot heal.
but nevertheless you exert yourself to drain it, or to break it with pliers, until you extract it in pieces;
and when you have accomplished your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put over it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; Then support the patient on their neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you set it free, if there is oil and water, then treat it with dyacin ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes in the wound and corruptions, and a clotting of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is known in such a manner that without suction with the urine: Therefore pour your drugs into the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause harm;
Then raise the wound with water and oil and soap, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed;
And it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is or conducted from the penis, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot issue; If the care of what I say thus, that you measure it many times, is one excuse for measurement by this cure. I have proven this thus.
Take I iron rod according to this form and let it be three angles fixed into one stick:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stones, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
Then put the bit in the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone. And turn the bit in your hand at the stone poke and poke, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side.
If the urine comes then press your hand upon that which is remaining of the stone which is within the shaft. Then it is broken and leaps out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread below the stone and the other above, then make the shaft straight against the stone between the two liens, then extract it further, and untie the lien, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound. and treat until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It happens that stones are found in women, and if they ever occur, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three things:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who reveals her (parts) to others, even when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands;
and the fourth manner is that perhaps the stone of the woman is deeper than that of the man, for which it needs to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises to this, then you must take a midwife well knowing, and at pains find one, and if you cannot find one, then no matter how subtle a chaste virgin;
and presents a well-wived woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and he commands her to do what you command him of the examination of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it befits him to push her finger or foundation and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, then she forces it under her finger, and he recommends that she put her finger or hand on the patient, and search and press her left hand on the bladder forming.
If she finds it, then it befits her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it is seen appearing, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his loin above the hip or below, and let the waist be first small.
and do not move his loin above the hip or below, and let the waist be first small. then push the loin into the waist, if you feel the hip so close to the wound as long as the hip can issue further, and know that many kinds of hips are:
that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and which have reins.
if you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the wound does not close, put on it ground vitriol, and hold it for an hour until the wound is stained;
then return to your work, as long as the hip is further, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the hip for men to help you in your work;
And if the wound is bleeding and it's from an artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and bind it with bandages and don't start again those things, and leave the stone and don't milk it at all, because by chance the patient could die. Then heal the wound.
And when the heat of blood is appeased, and the tissues become hard, then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm.
Ramice aquouse is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syrup, which is out of the yolks of eggs, that contains the egg.
And it is called "syrup", and never properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is the other egg; and this is the skin of the region between the white (syfa) which we have said.
and those do not happen at all, no. And the generation of this branch is so weak that it comes to the joints, and that matter is spread.
And never does it come from percussion on the regions, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining in yellowness, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more:
and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white syfac as we have said, then it is the abscess reopens, as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the regions, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper tissue, then it is the abscess reopening with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white (skin), one feels it well
therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe all the intropositor quite well, for its form is before According to what then comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the fullness of his body.
then place him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put beneath him many cloths;
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the scrotum;
then take the spatula lead, and cut the skin of the scrotum among them long up to near the groin, and let your incision be completely straight dividing the skin of the scrotum until the white (skin), and scarify subtly according to your power;
Then pierce the sty into the fluid at the wide opening, and extract all the fluid, and then put your dressings, and stand the sty upward.
and do not touch the head of the coals, but only the sty; cut all or in parts evenly the costus from him skillfully, that if you do not cut it well wisely, it will return the fluid.
and if the eye-lid was in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sty;
then assemble the two eyelids of the head of the coals with a suture, then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood;
Then cut the cone to the entire suspensory ligament, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; If you cut the other part just as you did the first one equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a half-soaked rag in rose oil.
If you cut the other part just as you did the first one equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a half-soaked rag in rose oil. And put outside another rag soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two cones, and put cloths doubled above them, and bind it above all the ligament according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and employ them of wool wadding according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit.
and the other two chiefs above the two angles, and let the restraint be all assembled in the buckle of the arm.
And at no time is this branch of cautery medicated in place of iron cutting tool, and it is that you prick the subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the water is uncovered;
So take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac with one incision, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And cut in every way that you can, as long as you are scraping all of it;
and keep that the fire does not touch the sac.
And know that this work is more healed; and moves guarding against the flow of blood, and avoids that the works of cutting.
And if nothing opposes you, or abscess, or running of blood, or another thing, cure what opposes you, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, administer perforation as I tell you, and when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the water root is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat. Then pierce the abscess in the part below to the whole spatula wide, and put the perforation through the long of the body;
And let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out.
Then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave for it to run out the remaining water, then cure it until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put in a pen or the instrument with which we treat the water of the dropsy, whose form is before.
and widen the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient.
Know that in the section of this root there is fear in many cases, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and even so in the joints; and it is by many causes.
This is to know by excess of acid and hot, which is spread to the joints, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body. And it finds no pain, and is a painful abscess.
And by chance there are some painful and dangerous abscesses, and of a bad color, and sometimes come from the outside of an artery or from inflammation of a vein.
When it is from the outside of an artery, then it is recognized by the position of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And it is not right that you touch it.
The one which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its position at the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an incision on this appearance and on the other sores. And that you cut the heart of the sores, then it is in front and the tail further down, and deliver the suspensory on all sides of the head.
If the head is already joined with these sores, then it is necessary that you cut the head and the heart.
And if it is near the skin or in those that are within the vessels, then you must deliver all of that tent, and wrap the top roundly.
And if the birth of the bone is or its rear, then it is necessary that you cut it all and remove the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is accomplished, then use the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and in wine, then the cure with other cures until it is healed.
This is a boil enveloped in an envelope resembling the bourgeon, with the softening of the edges, and the patient cries out sharply when it moves.
And the treatment of this disease is just as dangerous as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the edges down to their groin, and cover the entire vessels that are near the penis, and stretch them out.
Then cut with a sharp spatula through the vessels in width until they are open, and then scrape from each side, just as we said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
then he inserts a needle where it has the doubled thread, and ties it to the first place where the vein came, and ties it straight to the other end. then he cuts them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted humors;
then he heals the wound like the others where one avoids a bowe, so that no vessel leaks that would nourish one of the corners;
because by those no evil comes, and if all the vessels come alive, then it is necessary to draw the corners of all the vessels; so that the vessel does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
The happening of this ramic is thus by the section that comes or where it is placed, or the extension above the belly in the part of the bowels, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is either due to a blow or to the stretching of it, and these two manners of damage come from many causes:
or by percussion, or by jumping, or by falling, or by lifting a heavy weight, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is an extension due to a blow are that it happens in small parts, along a long time period, and does not come suddenly; and the abscess is even up to its point, because the blow quickens the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the abscess, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and there are various appearances of abscesses under the skin, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the abscess.
And sometimes it happens that the intestines are caught with the belt, and held in, and cause great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, for which it behoves to avoid it.
And the manner of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to pull back the intestines with his hand inside the wound if he can enter it; then be sewn up above its neck between your hands, and raise its hips;
then is the hair on the above, and cut all of the skin of the scrotum from long. then put inside the books of the waist pins according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue out.
then skin the soft flesh that is below the skin of the scrotum, until the white flesh be uncovered from all parts;
then put your two index fingers in that which follows the scrotum, in that which is between the white flesh that is below the skin of the [testicle], and between the second flesh, and depart that which is behind the [testicle], and between the second flesh;
and then move with the right hand inside the hair of the scrotum, and have the white flesh on top to your left hand, and lift the [testicle] to all the flesh toward the waist; and command the minister to extend the arm upward, and untie those that are behind the ligament.
and seek at his two sides if he has any point of the intestine enveloped or white and hard there, and if you find none of these things, then put it into the belly below.
Then take a needle or one that has the thick thread made of many threads, and put it into the rear part of the soft spot, which is after the skin of the buttocks. after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads. Then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the soft spot, about which we have said that it is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong bandage of two parts. Then envelope the hairs of the threads and bind them together in the form of two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for an abscess. and put directly the linen according to the first linen long II must of that one, and after these II linens leave to the sifac which is below the heart of the loincloth the great one of a doe; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut in the part which is below the skin of the loincloth, as long as the sinew, and the bow, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the linen that we have said. And sometimes is cauterized the white of the eye as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of the flowing of blood. For this happens many times, and leave the linen as long as it dries through it;
and if it delays in drying, so be raised from hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it dries;
Then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to do the cure by iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a branch which is joined to the trunk, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cutting above or lightly below.
Then cut into it, and cure the abscess from those who work on it, until the vessels flow;
And cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the flesh;
and let no parts of the bowels come out towards the genitals, and if any do come out, it is bad, and repair all hours;
and nevertheless if it remains too long at this point, the wound or abscess swells so that the intestine rises.
and this happens because of the extension of the abscess which is swollen, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swollen with its parts and opened.
And the cure for this is by cautery, as we have said before;
and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way: And that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cut the area of the rupture swollen in breadth according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the abscess that is under the skin which you have cut, then take the iron and place it on the appearing area of the abscess;
and he presses at the forepart of the belly, then counts their two appearances of the sciatic upon the head of the thigh, and counts one and the other
then extracts the head of the thigh, and does not cut of the sciatic nor extend any other thing, as I have made you know in the cure of the hernia of the bowels; then cures it by the cure of wounds.
then cures it by the cure of wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound as long as it is healing.
The wound is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times is softened the skin of the testicles in some men, because those things that are within are softened, and it is made to be seen;
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie upon his back, and one cuts the skin which is softened upon the natural skin;
then assembles the two lips with a stitch, and if you see, first stitch the superfluity of the softened skin to three stitches or four firmly;
then  bind between the ribs, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread.
through chastisement
Know that chapterings are common in our law, and for that reason I would like to not speak of them in this book.
and it is necessary only for two manners:
of which one is that the  mirrors know how to answer when they are asked, and also how to treat them;
and the other, because we often need cauterization of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Therefore I say that cauterization is done according to two manners: either by attraction, or by cutting.
In the one that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the parts are softened and pliable; Then take hold of them with your hand, until they are put back in place and you no longer feel them.
Of the chastisement of the waist: It behooves you to hold the beast, and press the skin of the buttocks with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut on each side at the hip, when you have well scorched them.
and I leave no point of the syfac and the subtle syfac which is on the vessels.
and this manner of chastisement is more effective than the one that is done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing of the members remains, so the beast desires lust.
then care for the wound until it is healed.
Of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is according to two manners as men: one if between the two sexes it appears like the figure of a woman, or there is hair, and sometimes the urine comes out short.
And the other manner is so in women, and it is on the pointed part also like a rod and they copulate.
And the care of the man and woman is that you cut the joined parts all off, and treat them like other wounds;
in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
A wart is a carbuncle attached to the natural part, until it is too ugly to see. and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
You should trim the excess of the wart to your hand or ones you have, and cut it lightly;
and don't pull too much from it, so that bleeding doesn’t come out, then the cure of other cures until it is healed;
and to another car that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and the stem, and by chance it happens, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this they called it in ancient times "cow disease". If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the origin, and cure it until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and is natural by birth, or by accident through illness that has come to it;
and is natural by birth, or by accident through illness that has come to it; or is caused by  a charmed joint or by subtle or strong sorcery, and is done in the thighs, or ribs, or underarms, or wherever;
and prevents conception, and childbirth, and possibly flowers from blooming;
And the knowledge of these things is through the regard of the healer.
If the stroke is approaching near, if it pleases you to your two or to the right.
If it is from subtle sorcery, and it is close to the two books, hurry then, and do this:
Put your two index fingers together, and the woman be on her back, legs spread;
then form the two books, as long as the subtle sorcery is strong, and until the numbness is over;
then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the spot, and lay the woman flat at home each day so that she cannot move.
And if the suture is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the stoppage is of flesh, then suspend it at the end and the top.
And have the blood-thinning medicines, such as Acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of egg yolk.
Then administer a wide plank splint so that the wound cannot close;
And thus it will be for a long time, and administer to him a tent of dry linen.
Then be cured with other dressings until he is healed.
And when a boil comes in the flesh, it must be treated according to this manner, unless it is an inflamed abscess. For an abscess that is in the marsh, one must not touch with fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened.
And we have said in the division the similarities of those [symptoms], and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the piles, when they are driven into the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, unless by iron cure.
Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those that one can cure.
Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then take the hardened part with tongs and cut it at its roots, then powder on blood-restricting medicines such as Acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
Then put his feet to the air for an hour, then put it in cold water.
And if blood comes out of the incision, make him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster on his back with it.
And if he withstands it, it is good. If that doesn't work, let him place suction cups on the back and breasts without hurting them;
Then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply it there.
And when the abscess heals, treat its place with ointment until it is healthy;
And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles the harsh herb, so it should be covered as I said in the previous section. and then treat it until it is healthy.
Many ways of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancre and stony abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and more diseases that I have said in the division.
Therefore I say in this treatment the hot abscess that comes on the arm, which is not like abscesses that swell.
and if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is hard at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. Therefore do not hasten to lance it, but let it mature until the pain is eased;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he can recline, and support him on his back and bring his legs together towards the outside of the leg;
and let his thighs be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;
then follow it towards the right side, and there administer the instrument with which one works the mouth of the marsh, so that afterwards comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you see administering this instrument, you first make the rake in order to know the depth of the marsh, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instrument does not injure him;
and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument above, and that he holds the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, on the spatula left;
And when the wound is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moistened pads in rose oil, or in green oil dry;
And place the tent far from the wound to the edge of the flesh, and put outside on the flesh and on the linen blade clean moistened in water or malves are cooked;
Then cure after II days of oiling preceding these, until it is healed.
And no time lift the flesh and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and arnica long are cooked; Then return to the oiling.
And if the wound is set in the mire, then it behooves you to guard against cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth The profession is first to the midwife that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman pressing down, and desires to smell the air.
therefore the child must hurry with force to straighten therefore know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under its head, and the second one with it.
and when you see these signs, then it is appropriate to gently press on its belly so that the child issues forth quickly;
because when it descends onto its head, then comes the second one with it, and is cleansed the womb of its superfluities by good purification;
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Because it comes sometimes on its feet, and comes forth with the body or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes onto its belly, or loin, and is converted by chance onto its neck, and by other bad figures;
so it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
If the infant comes out of its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and the strength of her is weak, then let them sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her.
and rose its nature of oil or fennel be cooked, and then put the bath between her thighs with the little spatula whose form is here: And split the perineum, and cut to its fingernail as far as the moisture that is inside it comes out;
and take the womb of the woman as long as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer a clyster of fennel husk with sesame oil to the woman;
then let her take and sneeze from condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: Then now extract the infant.
And if the two hands are dislocated, it is necessary that you reset them gently, bit by bit. and if they cannot go in, put the woman on the seat, and raise her feet up high; then unseat the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the unseating;
and if the hands cannot go in, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the knife which is placed before, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
of the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even;
then grasp its feet and extend them bit by bit.
If it jumps to the hips, then command to take hold of, and let it sneeze from its condition; if it shall jump, God willing.
And if it is not healed as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. Therefore, there he lightly treats.
And if it does not come as we have, say that you take mustard seed of millet, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in the mortar; and put it on the woman's area inside and cover this ointment, then have her sit in a bath of hot water until under the ribs;
and when she is softened underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the seat, then have her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and gently pull on her belly, for the child will now jump.
of the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, put the bailiff to his hands little by little; then be careful on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and be lying on the bed; And bends his hands back and forth, and then takes the hands over the belly, and he pushes the cushions down, until she is positioned below. And if the child does not jump, then he takes his feet and moves them forcefully, then he lifts the belly upward, then he pushes with his hands. and he shakes the child back and forth. And instructs the woman to tighten herself until the child is delivered.
of the birth of the child who comes out with a hand wide It is necessary to engineer bringing back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman rise and leave.
if she cannot leave, then have her lie on the bed and forcefully bend her legs;
then administer the medication that I have recounted.
and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a stool, then study bringing back the hand; and nurse the child according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to refrain from moving as long as the child breathes.
of the delivery of the child upon his neck, and let his hands be spread, and his face turned towards the back of his mother It is necessary that the midwife grasps her hand, then turns it back and forth, and nurses gently.
and when it is equal, she places it on the natural muscle tissue of the high and oil it, as we have said, then commands her to move it back and forth.
and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to sneeze. and make her sneeze. In this same manner to all the back
In this same manner to all the back When it comes to be this way throughout the whole secondine, she cuts the secondine with her fingernail until the moisture is emptied.
and if the child strains on her face and neck, she cuts it from the bud, so that it is not held back, and kills the child.
Then put the child inside, as long as you have put him as it is right, and command the woman that she does not touch herself at all times.
of the issue of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and never three or four. And this is not a strange thing, but it happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named at all.
Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named at all. I know that they, being multiplied, and are divorced by the force which divides them, which is joined to the bud.
And sometimes they come out as naturally as a single joint, as we have said.
And if they come out roughly, so treat them as we have said, and let the bandage be subtle, and make it quickly and lightly what it does. and do thus as it is worth moving to health. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marris I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of its wise glory, and it is necessary that the bandage know all this, because perchance similar things happen. if it is done according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or she has fear of death;
so it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her shoulders inclined downward, and the legs raised;
and the minister holds her by the sides, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not moved during the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils with mulch of elder and fennel and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and mulches;
then put them in the woman's mouth gently, then press where she pushes out the contractions so they are comparable to these, and take heed if the child is appearing that it descends on its head;
if push the contractions in her eyes or her neck or her mouth or in her palate or under the chin or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the contractions are at the legs, put them where the hip and the middle of the ribs;
and it is necessary that he hold the needle in his right hand, and place the bend between the two of the left hand, and push it with all his hand lightly, and put the needle into any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing
then insert against the other needle, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal;
and then make them equal by moving from one side and the other, so that it goes in smoothly, and let the needles be toothed to hold better, as this is the form:
And if any part remains, anoint the ball with some of his oil in that part, and push it in, and draw the other part;
and if there remains none of it, put this one-cine or higher place, and do so until it goes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, it is necessary that you envelop it on the cloak, until it goes out completely. then the cape at the joint of the sole or to the knife, and in this way you must do in the other hand, and as well with the feet.
And if the child's bone is thick and it is obstructed in the exit, or where it has a sharp point assembled, it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two, and making the head and extract the sharpness; or you turn it to the instrument that is called "almidach", because the form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one;
and in the same way do so if the child has a large natural head;
and then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is strained by force, it should be split, until the moisture which is or worse comes out.
and if it cannot come out, cut it in pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on his feet, the traction is light, and the delivery at the mouth of the womb is easy.
And if it is in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you draw it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand. and rub the belly or breast until the moisture inside comes out.
and if the other members are obstructed and the head remains, put your hand in the mouth of the vagina and pull it until the mouth of the vagina. then he puts it back in one place or the other, and the bone is healed.
and if the mouth of the abscess is tightened because of the heat cauterization that has come, it does not need to be worked on, but instead one must administer moist and fatty things. and administer poultices, and sicca in softened and moisturizing water.
And if the child is on its ribs, and you can put it straight, administer those things we have said in a living child;
and if one cannot do this, then the bone will be healed in pieces, and nothing of the secondary (fragment) shall be left.
And when you have done this, administer those things we have said in abscesses that come in the mouth;
and if bleeding occurs, it is put in restraining water, and other treatments are administered.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other. After long time there came an abscess in the swelling, and it inflamed so much that it opened and began to great purulence.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not solder the wound.
I placed a strong plaster on it, and after some days one bone protruded, and after some other days another. I was much amazed because this one whose belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was bones of a dead child.
I washed the wound, and with my hands I moved the bones, until the woman was in a better state; and treated the woman for a long time thus, and so it came to pass that she had a little bit of swelling from there.
And I haven't recorded this chapter for anything else than because when the masters find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.
Here after comes the form of the pressure, which one has in the books;
and to II turns as II joints of II limbs. Nonetheless, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be 1/2 inch wide, and the margin of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half; and among the two limbs be two joints of this same fist, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or an inch more;
and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the mare for opening when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers; and it has two joints with two adjustments, as you see, half a palm long, and two widths wide;
and when you see to open the mare with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, her feet dangling and legs open, then put the two adjustments together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; Then work your hand on all the instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the jaws, as long as the bait does what it wants.
These instruments are all surmounted, and multiply their likenesses. And when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much is more haste in the work, and higher for men for their quantity.
If you do not disdain the instrument, so long as it is well prepared for it its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her arm, and then make her sneeze of condition, and restrain your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps for this, well is.
If this is not the case, then take an iron pot, and make a perforated cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the jaws, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
then put a chain or a perforated piece in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and steam it until the vapor comes from within the patient's mouth;
then make him sneeze, as we have said. If the second bone leaps violently.
And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, as we command the midwife to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in the mucus of a leek, and then put it into the patient's orifice, and  rub it with the second finger; and when she will have found it, she grasps and extends it little by little straight ahead so that the patient's mouth does not close during the extraction;
but then you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes and unties itself.
And if the mouth of the nose is blocked, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not relieved by all that we have said, then be careful that you do not use the milk;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the nose, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then enema with ointment tetra-pharmacon; if she will endure and put it back, and come forward;
but nonetheless, when she endures, then a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and the patient becomes pale. Therefore it is necessary fumigation suitable to that:
none of the ancients have proven fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument for which one fumigates the woman to restrain the flowers and the womb is this:
And is to see similar to a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders broad over the fire.
and let be the fumigation over the coals, and the tar until it is roasted, and begin again another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle stitches. Therefore, it befits the midwife to pierce that stitch at its due place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the thread so that she does not touch it.
Then put on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the ointment care until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will set right again, then put in a piece of splint and leave the limb for many days, and remove it when the child wants to go into rooms.
And sometimes this stupefaction comes from a wound or an abscess. If it is necessary to cover that boil: if it is cured, as we have said of the plantain cautery.
Fistulas that come from under the foundation are knotted, and thicker than those that come from near the foundation of outside, or in the space between the two parts, whether it is one fistula or more.
And when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture from within brings out white or thin boils, and sometimes these fistulas are opened.
and they are known by those who feel them or have emission or venting when the patient has a bowel movement and perhaps one bursts out.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach up to the hip joint, and up to the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the base, and not piercing. And that you put your middle finger or foundation, and put a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if it has torticollis, put in a tent of fine lead, or horse hair, until you feel the tent or hair on your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus nor wind nor worm as we have said: know that it does not pierce. if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the channel of urine, if it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the thread comes up to that place; if there is no twisting and the invention of pain within, then it is that it is there bowed, and there is no use for medicine or treatment by ointment;
and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except for labor, and the vanity of foolish tricks that intervene.
In the one which is not persistent and is not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
and he lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his thighs inclined to his belly; Then set a tent of lead, or of plummet if there is torsion, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, then it is fitting that you put your index finger on it, if thus you feel that the tent has pierced.
and be uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is pierced; if it does not travel at all one cannot heal it.
It is said anyway one can well heal none, but this happens little;
and the help that one makes it, is if one cauterizes the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; And the end brings all heat into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation. and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred hairs are burned, which resemble the feather of an eye;
and then cure it with moist bandages smeared with butter, as long as those charred hairs are gone, then cure it with an ointment that hardens and heals.
If so, he is well.
If this, otherwise cannot be healed;
and if the tent enters and does not reach the bottom which is the foundation, and there is between your bottom and the tent a thick covering of char or sebac, and you see the fistula following this covering of the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then cauterize after, as long as it reaches the top of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and will fall.
then seize those charlatans who seem like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
And if the wound pains, and comes between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of those attached charlatans, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure of tents soaked in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound lies bowed, and if the charlatan is burned in the bowed;
then cure the wound of swollen onions with enduring hard char, and they are dry medicines.
For when it is reset, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes just to the bottom of the foundation, and is distant from the body, put your finger on it or its base, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and between it there is the cloth or the syfac or charlatan, or if he is near to piercing, then there is only a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put bandages on it and treat it as before.
and don't let it become too bad, that you cut the foundation holding it, and come the excretions by its willing sense; then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound then that it is cut from its foundation, or by bandage or by another pointed instrument; then clean the festered flesh in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and leave the fistula in the part outside the foundation;
then study to restore the wound, and leave the fistula in the part outside the foundation; if it is lighter thing for the patient.
And no times are fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or against the foundation near the skin above, so take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And he puts the thread wrong in it, and puts the tent at all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that one pierced, just as you put your finger or foundation;
and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it for one or two days;
and restrain it no time, until the threads have gripped those parts that are between two, and hold tight;
then treat the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in every way that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded. For it is not proper to make the lace for covering if they are so embroiled, and then care for it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very often one part and trenches; and on the other part no, because of which one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here;
Hemorrhages are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, as well as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, blood comes out, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation.
but those that are outside have little moisture, and in short, they come out with a little bit of clear water or a little blood, and have the color of the body;
and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch so they can lie in rooms, as long as the foundation is sore and the threads appear; if you hasten, and can hold it with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the clamp cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them to the drapery or cotton, or a piece of felt. and extract them with your two hands, then cut them, and powder above any hot powders that are in their place of cautery. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed.
and if the base cannot come out, then enema the patient with a harsh and sharp enema to wash what is in the base so that it can come out clearly. and if the patient endures well, and if the threads are further from the base, then the cure is light.
and if the patient endures well, and if the threads are further from the base, then the cure is light. and if you pick them with your finger or pliers and cut them, then cure them as we have said until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. If it is necessary that you administer the suture according to this manner:
If it is necessary that you administer the suture according to this manner: Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so let them be wide;
and tighten the thread firmly, then remove the needle, and do this for all the others, leaving one open to drain the excess blood;
then put on top of the foundation a soft cloth in rose oil or in cerate, and put it on top of the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave him until they heal, and when they are healed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until he is cured.
Of the drying of the veins or foundation Many times there is drying of fluids in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not useful. If it is necessary that you scrape to the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, which does not let it become moist; then treat until it is healed as it should;
and if it cannot heal, then begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scabbed over. then treat until it is healed.
from trembling A forence is a small appearance of fault before the body, and goes much in depth.
and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it also like death from chill, and comes in the whole body, and more to the hands than any other place.
And the treatment is that you take a feather of goose, or a feather of vulture strong, and put that feather on the chill, until the circles paint the chill all around. then turn your hand on the whole feather until you scrape all around the chill, and put it in depth, and scrape the chill from its roots.
And if you see this, do as follows of a hook of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above. Do not perceive, for to hold onto the two, and squeeze.
And if you see it, cauterize the flesh, like it is before in the chapter of cautery.
At times one makes a clyster of silver or archate, or lead melted or maillet;
and at times one makes of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. Those therefore who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Those therefore who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the enema tube small and great is this above wide, where the belly is tied in this manner
And if there is a separation or the belly is tied, like you see, and the shoulder blade is pierced inside;
and has on one of the ribs two pierced, and in the other one;
and the belly where one puts medicines of an animal bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and has between each hole a measure of space, then put in these holes one strong thread of spun wool twisted into X or intertwined, and assemble the belly like it is a kid; And when the medicine is inside, if the ligature is at the instrument in front of a strong thread, then enema.
And this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and ointment the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently. Then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together, until it is all expelled, then withdraws the enema, and raises the patient’s legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to flow out, then hold as much as you can. And if he sleeps all night straight through, it is of greater help.
And if you treat him with a laxative for a stomach ailment, and the medicine quickly departs, so let it return until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or an abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the clyster subtle with which the skin is strained
We have said in the previous section the cure of wounds;
or we will tell you about the cures of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from that which they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cuts of sword and knife, or spear or dart or arrow, or similar things;
or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care it is from blows of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt heavily of an abscess hot: if it immediately heals of the head, even if a little blood comes from the wound, and the bleeding is on the contrary side of the injured part;
and avoid the patient's intake of wine and heavy meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, then let his meat be lessened, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes from it, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in wine poultice;
and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not dryed by the air, powder, which I will say a little later;
and if the wound has dried, put on some ointments, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then bring them together by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds only by a bit, cut it. Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw it away, then heal it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without a cautery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it displaced, tie it with a thread. And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put in this powder which unites as if the iron had melted it.
And the manner of the powder is: Take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; Heat live III parts, and powder finely, and apply to the wound, and restrain it firmly, until it closes well and joins with all its blood;
and then cover it well, and let it remain unbandaged, if it does not swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with caulks alone, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
And if the burn has broken open the wound, even in this state, do not put this powder on it;
but apply some digested ointment or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals well; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound comes at the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation so is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as  calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and calcined wash also in sweet water, and other minerals according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then stitch and bind with bandages, then treat until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is raised and full of pus, then pierce or lower them;
and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes out, then sever it, and tie it, and cauterize it if it is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is kept, because the flesh goes, so sew the heart above the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form. and then restrain it well, and leave it for some days, then cure with ointment dressings until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so desire it; and if there are pieces of bone, treat them as much as you can, and what you cannot have, leave it until the wound rotts, and be cleansed and align the opening.
And if the wound is fresh, put the powder on it that I said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, so treat it as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or a knife and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there is windiness as the patient complains. Then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any of the powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it up to keep the blood from flowing too deeply, and returning to the heart, and killing the patient. but I put attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day;
and if you have no ointment, put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; if there come not any spasm, nor bad shaking of heart nor straining of arm; and when you see the good dispositions, then you know that the wound is saved. Heal it then with bandages and other dressings, as long as it be healed;
and if it cannot heal, and opens, then you know that there is a fistula.
then treat it as one must. And if the wound is of incision of sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it as above. if it is large, sew
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, so close the wound, and bring out the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not loose, leave the wound to rot, it will lighten the extractions;
and for other wounds in other members, the judgment is as we have said.
of the displacement of the belly
The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small;
from the large wound, sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines come out, because of which the intrusion of others;
and the suture is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because of which one puts back the intestines in, if not done immediately after.
Because the intestines swell at once when they feel the cold, they return more to points, and for this reason the middle wound hurts more, because of this one resets the intestines to their place like the others II.
And know that a rupture of the belly is in IV manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the other sutures of other wounds of the body and two other special sutures are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has come out, and it is a matter of putting things back, this is by one of the two manners: either for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in hot water with saffron and cypress and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and never make this wine restraining, and it moves only that little to deflate.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with lukewarm water or ale and herbs are cooked, because by this it is aligned the entrance to little things;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut;
and the first cure is to be made smaller than the incision, that none of it should be cut without great necessity;
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if it is cut inside in the curve and outside not, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails protrude, you put them back in their natural form in their proper place, if you are able, because it is worth moving.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, put the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention so that the sunken part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
Small wounds put what you have seen, then hold in your hands the minister pitiful that holds all the rupture in his hand, and assemble the lips;
and this is the common way of suturing, and it is that you pierce an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one doe of space, and there put a needle where there is the good strong thread; and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the sinew, which is under the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the two heads of the sinew the four together.
then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two ends of the wound evenly, and then leave one doe of space, and there put another needle.
then the tie of the thread as you have done with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until the whole wound is restrained.
And let the needles be medium, between fine and thick, for the fine needles pierce all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: For this reason, they should be medium.
And it is not fitting to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the stitching.
And then trim the tips of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapes on the wounds to keep them covered, and let them stay until the wound is stitched.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one or two needles suffice.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you assemble the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh together with one needle to which a strong medium thread is attached.
And when you will have pierced these bones all four together, then reset the needle to the part where you began, in the manner in which one sews drabs.
and put space between each suture the thickness of a man's finger;
This suture seven the man, and I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was two palms wide of intestines, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought him back his intestines after they had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound was healed up to XV days, and I treated him, and he was well.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not heal him with ointment, because I was in the place where one could not find any, nor any medicines; and I put half a pound of cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways to sew:
Take the needle, and push it from the outer part to the inner one.
When it has pierced the heart of right in a straight line, lay the head above the site where you pushed the needle in, and make it pierce from the other side from the inner to the outer.
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave one side of the site open, and take it up from the other, until the stitch is complete.
The second manner of stitching, that the Galens describes properly, is like when any one assembles the two parts together naturally, and apply one head of the site to the other head, in such a way:
Stick a needle or head of the mirror close, and make it pierce that point only, and leave the two heads of the site. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inside one, like the two shoulders.
Then make it pierce both from the outer part to the inside one, in two other shoulders of the mirror that are on the other side.
And this is the most common and usual manner of sewing.
The Gauls say this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each.
And one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the sewing is more grievous than the other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as if the fire has moved it, so put back the intestine and the skin;
then put on the powder containing charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, put on any ointment that is available, as long as the wound heals; and stitch the thread, and be joined the flesh, and the membrane; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it two times a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicine in more cases than the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a linen cloth lightly in oil of tempered heat, or rose oil, and put it around the joints, and under the buttocks.
And if he feels pain or rot in the belly, and this happens many times, then give enemas of black wine, and also if the putrefaction comes up to the intestine.
And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called «jeun» cannot heal when it is ravaged, and this is because of the planting of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps out of the wound, put it back inside as well as the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has become worm or black, it is necessary that you tie the place which is black, so that no blood comes out, because there are veins and arteries there.
Then take what is between the bones, and put the two heads during from beneath the wound all the way out to align the extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, because I have seen that some man was pierced through the belly by a spear.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and through it passed feces and flatulence.
I treated him according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed, and the edges were closed.
And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient would have badly in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better disposition, and ate and drank.
And certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such manner: Take fresh cloths of large tests, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the cloth has covered the opening, place it above the two edges so that it strains its mouth shut;
and then you cover the head, and it stays so that it cannot be untied, then place the other cloth after in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed; And sew the wound.
This chief is done in the intestine and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such manner:
Take the thread of this intestine that is quite clean, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine with it, and wind it into the rupture;
and this manner of stitching of fragments is not other than according to the way of hope and promise;
and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the great internal veins, there is nothing but subtlety
of fistula wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is closed and inward curved.
And a fistula is according to the truth a knotted and hard and white thing, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes clear and narrow, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is nothing other than by one of the IX causes: that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for his wickedness; or because he has hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to be born. or he has too much swelling; or the wounds are rotting, and the matter is of bad quality. or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature. or because the property in the region is tardy for digestion, and slow for health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones.
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is therefore necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by hand.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the bladder, or intestine, or kidney, or any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet. And if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar ones.
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to see it known, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if it wishes;
And if the fistula is crooked, then make a search of a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends itself around the crookedness;
And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it by tents, then have it clstered through one of the openings, because moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
Then carefully with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and are bruised in place, and ask the patient well of the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and where he feels it;
And when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then act according to what I have told you, and remove the foreign matter and corrupted flesh that are within;
And then care for it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep from right place, then it is necessary that you cut into it as deep as you can, then put moist bandages in medicinal ointment, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is at the bottom;
and then I put ointment for healing fresh flesh, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away.
If a vein or nerve does not strike or affect principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then  remove it as much as the corruption is gone, then cure with healing things for flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, and returns bowed as before, know that you have not gone all the way:
then expose and go as far as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep in part, that you cannot come to it. if there is nothing else but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with tweezers, if you extract it with a tool suitable for this, and if there are many bones, you draw them all, do not leave even one.
and if the moisture makes it difficult for you, and there is no error or fear, cut through both moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, place on the wound something preventing rot, and leave until the flesh around the bones is rotten, and then the bones will come out more easily.
And if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, you resect only as much of the corruption as the blackness has been removed completely, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part of corruption, and it comes to near the bone. Then it must be scraped and covered all the way to the corruption, and then it must be cured until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help with your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, until the materials came to the leg, and became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for opening.
But the physicians, through their folly, opened too much so that the abscess opened, and they corrupted a lot of material, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of pus that all flowed out and moist from within the body.
and many a man was cared for for two years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I came to be called upon him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what ran out through the wounds; and the body of the youth became red at the joints, and had a citron color.
I placed a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and dug into one of the wounds until I discovered a portion of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came as far as the inner bone;
I removed that which appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption, except that which I removed;
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not heal it;
And then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and I treated it, and then I set the bone, and I prepared to solder the place. But I could not do more than I joined together around a palm of the bone, and the traitor was pulled to its whole size, then I restored it with medicines. And it was healed and joined immediately, and it was not necessary to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For the blood evacuation often happened, but it was cured entirely, and in the place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was in good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary at all, neither to going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: Take linen and tie it to the head of the bone that is open, and command anyone who stretches it upward. and put another link of linen bigger than the first one, and tie it on the flesh which is above the bone, and hold the head so that you pull the corrupted flesh down below, and uncover the flesh on the place where you see should be, so that the skin does not bleed from the flesh;
and put a piece of wood or a board below the bone to move and cover the corrupted flesh;
and it should be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and should be still another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely;
then put the piece of wood below, and then move it from one part to the other the corruption, and be the suture of the long side of the corruption the point, as we have said;
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and bone where it contains from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else to cut;
And if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or the finger of the foot, it is a very serious thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you. And purify it in every way that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not cause you contrary.
And know that the cutting instrument and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; And for this reason it is necessary to equip each type of work with its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases. If you consider the instrument which you need according to what is appropriate.
The shoulder can dislocate either inward or outward;
and when you have medicated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the dislocation comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or from the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the limb;
and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and after the blackness, then that corrosion from limb to limb goes, and takes hold of the whole body.
If you hurry to cover it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come until the hand.
And if it comes until the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come until the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then cover it with the knife;
And if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no worth administering further remedies than the quantity of its virtue.
And so do all this when the corrosion comes or foot. If it comes in the first joint, then cover it after the other joint.
And if it comes to a foot, cover the whole foot. and if it ascends to the leg, cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister on one of the ties below, and others ministers the other tie above, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ties to a spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered;
then cut or sew, and put on each side the draping of linen, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess clothes.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the place thoroughly, or you put on some restraining powders.
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you that it happened to the man in his foot:
He had a blackening that resembled fire burns, and this corrosion first came in his instep, until it encompassed the whole foot.
And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed.
And long afterwards the corrosion returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things  receptive after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
And he urged me to cover his hand, and I refused because I had hope of containing the matter. and doubt also if he cuts his hand, that he may not die because the virtue of the man was weak.
and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed.
and I have not this recounted outside of that which one does otherwise, if one has need.
Sometimes an abscess comes in its fleshy place, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and out leaps the pus, and remains in its place as a vessel. and the skin which is above it is as fine as a delicate tapestry, and does not run until to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called 'sound,' and is not called 'fistula';
but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone making a path, it is called “fistula”;
and the skin there is that you cut that skin all around, and also when it is thinned, like a cloth; and do not let it for its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will harden, and the corruption is not in its path, and the skin is thick of flesh, then treat it with a clyster like this:
look if the breasts are large, and the bosom that is in it is of foul odor, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take ails, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of those according to your need, and make them sharp and in honey, and in a clyster the breast, and restrain the opening; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
do this many times, until the breasts are drained and the pain is removed.
and at no time is a clyster of water and ashes used when this medicine is present, and that you take ashes from a vine stick, and pour water on top, then let it drain, and in a clyster, until you know that the breasts are well drained.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water and ashes, then clyster them with water and honey or where there is a piece of litharge ground; or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes it dry.
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well purified, then you will make a clyster of those which cause flesh to be born in it, and that you take plaster diaphinit, and do it with rose oil and wine;
or you will make a clyster of certain medicines and ointments, about which I have spoken of the properties or treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter it, then widen it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basil oil, as long as it is widened;
and if the wound is too large, then you sew it and leave only as much space as the clyster can enter, and if the opening that gives birth to the bowel is above, then cover or lower the level where it is.
and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner that the stomach descends to its lowest point because when the stomach is full, there does not let flesh enter and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner: that the stomach descends gently downward, and leave nothing of the stomach behind.
that the stomach descends gently downward, and leave nothing of the stomach behind. and take consolidated medicines to put upon the groin, and be over the linen cloth that covers the whole groin. then cover as forces the spot of the groin more wide than the first one, then be ointment under the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the groin to align the stomach, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once;
and he who is through the breast wound, bone often to remove the bowel, and know those that run from the bowel, if it's venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take ward if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or no, and when your medicine has been in such a manner extended and you see the nature that jumps on the breast wound, so you know that the breasts are already healed, and approaching health;
and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, so change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle venoms come after a long time, if it does not trouble you of health, for the health approaches.
For there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is delayed, and those who do the opposite;
and if the indigested bowel jumps from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not healing;
And if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, so apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, like diaphinit ointment, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
Take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
Then confit it and use it;
And the same way, make honey cooked with rose petals, when diaphinit ointment is not present, or take frankincense, aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
And then glue it to the cloth, and place it over the breast, and sometimes administer a long stalk of aristolochia, and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour made from chickpeas and wormwood; And in the use of simples or of composites: Grind them, and make a powder, and put on top the honey that I said, and use it.
And if the wound is prolonged and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has entered deep, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs. if the cure of a fistula, as we have said before.
A panaritium is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other places.
And when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then an abscess comes, and it corrodes and throws out a boil until it corrodes the root of the nail, and perhaps the whole thing.
And comes the corrosion to the bone, as much as it comes painful pain, and is the shoulder of two large, and is the color fluxed.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity which is left of the wound, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint presses the flesh in and it begins to prick and swell, then it is necessary that you put the cautery under the joint so that it does not prick the flesh, and thrust it upward, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and place on the remaining flesh medicines ardent and corrosive to remove all; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it further, because as much as the bone is corrupted it cannot heal;
and if you see the two do corrupt, then cut it in one as we have said before, then care for it until it is healed
and if it is broken and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first.
then cut the joint with a sharp spatula by cutting across above, and guard that the cut does not come until the flesh which is below the joint, because the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top which soothes.
The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance there is some where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us of the two.
He who is born in any place of the two does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance may move.
The cut of he who is fleshy is light, in this manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if you hold him to cut.
In someone who is born or must have the afterbirth removed, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh around until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this, then cure it until it is healed.
The soldering that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by soldering of wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you cut that suture so that it may heal according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not fuse together; or you put between two pieces of thin lead until the ligaments are fused, as it is fitting.
If a joint comes together with its palm, so bind it as is fitting.
Veins are thick envelopes full of melancholic superfluities that come into many members of the body;
and there are more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.
It therefore becomes necessary for you to administer to him once purging of colocynth, then a potion from the basilica.
The cure of iron is according to II manners: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; And the other manner is that you raise the vein, and treat it with all force.
The size is according to this manner: First put the leg in hot water very strongly, until the swelling is diminished, then bind the leg of the patient from above the hip to below the knee;
Then cut the vein in its place, whether in I or II or III, with a wide incision, then elevate and treat with force drawing out the black blood from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the disease allow.
And then bind it up, and command him to stay with black-legged meat;
And repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the limb follows this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell.
And if you have no bathing water, heat it over the fire, and then apply the hot water to the vein of the long bone in the thigh or at the part below the ankle.
Then open the skin with the scalpel, and scrape the vein on each side until it appears when touched.
And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord;
Then pull the root down until it is elevated from the skin, and then cut it lightly with the scalpel, and then put it in another place above III joints.
Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it at the base, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you did first.
Then cut another opening, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut to the double of the foot, then thread and lift up to the second incision.
Then extract it piece by piece, until it is completely out, then cut it.
And if you cannot thread and lift it, then put a needle into the entire strong double thread, and tie and thread it, and put it below the base, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it comes out. And keep that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot thread or lift it, and it brings much trouble to the patient.
and when you have treated it completely, put on the wound a cloth moistened with wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the skin is constricted and twisted and covered together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it jaggedly, but do not cover it. and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which you cut the skin is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut into the vein;
and is of a thick curve, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where there do not grow herbs nor trees, and in land where it has no moisture;
And by chance, it is born in other places than the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes the color, and begins the vein to go forth as a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wrap around one piece of plank from one and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time that there is pain on the outside, wrap around the plank, and tie it.
and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is all out. because if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings an abscess and rot there, and a bad illness.
Therefore, for that reason, it is necessary that it be treated piece by piece until the top, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of length, or of ten, and one man came to me, whose it went out for ten palms long, and when you cut it, it brings out the root or pierced, and pierces it to the bottom, so that all comes out;
And be emptied the matter which is within, and administer at the place medicines preventing corruption any day, then the cure as with the abscesses.
And sometimes in this vein many pains, and even when it opens at the joint of the foot, or of the foot, and there comes much blood, and from which it jumps out;
Cure therefore as we have said before.
of worms which are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land “disease of the ox”, because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes through the whole body rising and falling, and one feels it well at the alert of limb in limb, until they reach the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
and is caused by the rotting of some humors, such as those that come from worms and lice and roundworms in the belly
and one doubts its malignancy, because when it goes through the body and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and milked, then it can only be driven away when it goes:
so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong linen tightly, then cut above it and drive it out, and if it goes back into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain under it the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and the path be cured.
and it is necessary to use the patient with purification of body and medicines soluble for the corrupted humors, and beware of rotten meats.
of the pain which comes from windiness This malady is called in our land 'vakirir', and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
and I see what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and I looked after, and I saw it rise also as a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as if live silver when it moves from place to another.
The pain departs from that place, and it goes into the shoulder, and then a little after it spreads throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm.
Then she told me that she was turning back around her body, as I saw her.
I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this sickness in this manner. Nevertheless, I wanted to move the pain from that place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins uncovered, and for this reason appeared that constraint of windiness.
and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins covered.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, so tie above and below gently, and then cut on top until that constraint of windiness has issued forth. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those who expel wind ailments, such as fetid pills and wormwood pills, and similar ones.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they enter.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and smooth; and those that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those that have parts;
and those that fall in any member, they fall in two ways; or in principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterward, appears to you: Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many cases. And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the skull which is above the brain, is when there is clouding and numbness and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of mucus; and perhaps this with pain from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and leaps from the wound white moisture resembling pus, and also leaps as if burning of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the wound, and treat the arrow if it is not already out.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or rests in the body is that it is near the left breastbone, and it feels as if it were lodged in something hard, not hollow. and by chance the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: Know then without doubt that death is approaching.
And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the common is that without pains of foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the sick turns color, and sighs high and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the ribs, it is near the small ribs. and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and moves all the limbs from the shoulders.
And if the arrow strikes or stomach, by adventure there leaps out from the wound some thing of undigested meat.
And if the arrow falls or into the belly, and in no place of bone through the gut, there is no hope for healing, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain. Know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder joint and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and the seeming members, are safe according to more disposals. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason that you do the same thing.
It happened to a man that an arrow fell into the root of his nose. I tried it, and it came out on the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling anything.
And in another case, an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye below the eyebrow, and the arrow was embedded, and I could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, to all the iron light without ears;
The fellow was healed, and no bad accidents befell him.
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was Arabic with ears;
I removed the barbs, and I carefully extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian was healed.
And treat an arrow to a man, who it was in his chest or belly, and thought he would die.
and then that he had passed XXX days, so he did not change his condition. I cut above the arrow, and I enclosed it, and I pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
And if a man has an arrow that fell in his back, and the wound is closed on top;
and the arrow stays inside him, and does not change his natural dispositions, nor does he feel any inconvenience in any of his natural works.
And if another man has an arrow that fell in his face, and the wound is closed; and stays like that without suffering much pain;
and many other similar things.
And they pulled out an arrow from the prince's man, who had it lodged in his neck, and was slightly leaning to the right side. And the arrow was completely hidden.
I was called to care after it had fallen three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I examined it thoroughly with a fine touch, and felt nothing of it; and it did not feel any sharpness or pain below its right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed above its location a poultice atractive and digestive, because its skin did not swell; and the skin around the arrow appeared.
and the skin around the arrow appeared. I put the poultice for a few days, and it closed the wound immediately, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow one day within his nose;
and he told me this. I put on the wound an acrid corrosive medicine for a few days until it was open, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which was becoming loose at that place.
Then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with this medicine sharp, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
And pierced well the ends during IIII months, and then enlarged the wound that I put in forceps, and my pliers on one side and the other, and it cannot come out;
Therefore, I did not cease to subtly tinker and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day forceps well made, according to those whose form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I pulled it, and restored the wound.
And the wise judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I therefore restored it, and the wound was soldered, and the patient was healed entirely.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on those which I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend everything.
but the wise masters compare on very little thing, and on what is present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not from the members where they are fixed further than according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which is further by the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and never further now.
And if it does not go further, let it remain as long as the flesh is porous inward, and let the exit be open;
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot issue, let it remain thus for some days, and move it each day;
and therefore she jumps, and if she does not jump, then it pierces around to the whole forest subtle, until the lews around are enlarged, and then the treat.
And if the arrow is returned in its place in the body and one cannot see it, then one looks for it with all their strength. and if you feel it, treat it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the depth of the wound, and the great depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein, then make a cut as long as the wound is large;
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, then remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it out;
and be careful that you do not break the arrow, that you may draw it out more easily.
And if you cannot at once, lay it until the place is softened, then treat it, because extraction hurts. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and put everything as much as you can to draw out the arrow safely, whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently;
and put the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it apparently:
cut then, as much as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it: if it leaps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out;
and if the shaft of the arrow is left in, pull out the whole shaft;
and if the shaft has fallen, and you see to administer force, then administer the instrument so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument;
and then push forward, and if the arrow is stuck, put an instrument with a pointed tip into it to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded, it behooves you to cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow falls in the chest or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it up, then cut into it.
and guard yourself from cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch up the wound, if it is necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the end of the hair is also like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the arrow, as it is in form.
Of veins that are used for healing there are thirty-one, because of which it has or head sixteen, namely: two behind the ears, which are called the two "herbaches"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples appear and the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is in the forehead and the vein that is at the back of the neck and the two jugular veins that are in the neck and the two veins that are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly draws blood in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the outer side of the arm, and the common people call it "the vein in the arm"; and the vein is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is found along the right rib, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the furrow, and it is the one from which one draws blood, which opens visibly above the pouch.
And the cephalic vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and little finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left rib, and the second is called saphenous which is at the ankle on the right rib; and the vein that is called "nerves", which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are III veins below those.
The sap of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and headaches;
and the qualities of the sap, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a strip, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their two places depending on the head: then place them [the sap] on your thumb, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, make it flow;
then take the lancet, and put it under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand on all the vein above, and cut both the skin and the vein well two fingers deep, and make blood flow as much as you see;
then bind and restrain it until it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for old migraine, and sore eyes, and habitual ophthalmia, and to sharp pains in the eyes;
and the qualities of the draining are as I say: and that the patient restrains his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulses below his back, and then directs the incision;
then lifts the key above the vein on his right index finger, and puts the lancet below it, and raises the vein upward, and cuts it, just as you have done with the other veins, and make a drawing of blood according to your need;
then unbind the patient, and put your hand upon the vein for one hour, then put on cotton; and then let it form a knot, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have spoken of this and their treatment and their extraction, how the book begins.
The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for diseases of the face ancients, and migraine, and redness.
and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears. then take the instrument which is called "fossor," whose form is this:
And put the point upon the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again open with a wide flame.
However, it does not behoove that the flames are too thick; and the healing should be across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The incision of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and to the chin, and to the redness, and to the pupil in the eye, and to diseases of the face.
And the qualities of their incision are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a bandage, as before;
then make the incision, and let it be the incision through the middle, one part long of the flame one part wide, for there is no flesh. And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks.
Then make a correction of the blood, as much as you need, and then place it on cotton, and tie it well.
The bloodletting of the vein of the nose is good for fevers, and for headaches, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes on the face, even when it is old.
And the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes the subtle long flame, and places it halfway between the two nostrils, because the vein doesn't open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
And don't let it go too deep in there, and make a correction of the blood according to your need, then tie it overnight because it is very quickly restored.
The blood of the II winds helps in the treatment of the ailment, and the beginning of melancholy, and many illnesses, and epilepsy, and corrosion, and herpes, and scabies.
and the qualities of the blood are that the patient strains his neck under both sides, as we have said.
and the master standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on the seat, then cuts open the vein long a little widely, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary.
then do the other part in the other vein, then untie the linen, and tighten both veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle. and leave him until morning, that the wound be healed.
of the vein of the leaves The bloodletting of the veins of the lips above helps in the ulcer in the mouth, and in the corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and in toothaches and pain
And the qualities of the bloodletting are to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins:
so cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and also make of the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The bloodletting of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the cephalic bloodletting, and it is to the stricture of the throat, and to diseases of the eye, and to diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side a black vein:
then one and the other, and do not pierce too deep into them, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly bled are drained according to two manners:
or they prick at the whole flame, morning wide, or olive subtle as you cut sharp, and it is called “ansel”; and are wide and subtle according to the width and the thickness of the veins. The form of the flame martin is very renowned, and is wide as you see.
And it is necessary for opening the veins that are swollen plains of gross blood apparent, and which contain gross and turbid blood; and this is the shape of the olive cut:
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly.
And it befits the physician to treat wisely, and to avoid the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a gushing of blood comes, then it befits him to stop it, as I have said. And he should not at all pierce with the flame, but cut like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it befits you to restrain it, and change to another; or you desire any vein of him, or you treat in his place the vein in the arm. It opens manifestly; and the cauterize to the flame as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you draw out the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with chalk, and then tie the arm, and cauterize the vein with a hot flame; and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swell upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your hand lengthwise on top of it, then remove your hand if the blood is still flowing, which many times happens; bind his arm, and leave it so, and do not move it to the patient.
and be wary, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not healed, and it bleeds, and the remedy is not present, then stop the artery if it opens, because the head of it. and heal the wound.
And take a rind of fig, and make it smooth, and take one half and bind it well until the next day.
if the wound heals, that is good. If not, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
and the healing is not always achieved in multiple situations due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The vein of the arm in the middle if helped so that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the healer to place it over the nerve that is below, and if it is not drawn too deep, he finds the nerve, and it swells, and his senses are numbed, and by chance may not heal.
And this nerve is open many times, and if it does not open in certain men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you feel the vein with a sharp instrument. And prick the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
The vein of the cephalic if helped, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
And it is necessary to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because it is the safest of all the veins, because it does not have an artery or a nerve. However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and do not grieve if it fails the first time, and one begins again. And by chance swells the veins in some men, because one fails the first time, but it does not matter.
The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that bloodletting is administered only for the sake of preserving health, and to prevent future illnesses;
and whether the bloodletting is done in one of the three veins that are or cut: that is to say, cephalic,  faste, and basilica. and one must bleed at the beginning of  priests to gain, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one must bleed him on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The bloodletting that is administered to the sick has no determined hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and in all times.
and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Let not those over sixty years old bleed.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it is done, it behooves them that he cleanse the bowels with a light clyster if they have much stool held back, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines superfluities corrupted harmful to the principal members.
and do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are so, nor dropsy.
and if it gets worse after colic passion, and vomiting, and stomach upset, and multiplication of womb in woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and all that virtue, or by thing of the arm or from the body;
then subtly the humors, if it is thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power;
then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly the blood, and heal you of the vein in the lower part or third, as we have said;
and keep yourself that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
and be quiet and joyful, and let the vein to be healed be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then restrain the linen above halfway, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the humors;
And then rub the place with hands, until the veins swell, and they feel them.
Then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then place his finger from his left hand above that vein below its place a little where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not escape and let the iron pierce it.
For there are veins that flee as cords when bleeding, and if to such that are full of windiness, so that when one puts upon the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these. and if he operates on the vein, it is too tight; therefore it is necessary that the bloodlettings be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it's good If it is not so, then begin again a little below that place or where there is swelling, if the place is not swollen.
And if the place is swollen, and the patient fears, let him leave it one or two days, and do not tie up the arm: For adventure there may come a boil.
Do not enter into a bath, then begin again the cauterization if it pleases him.
And if the opening is small, or the blood comes subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening all the flame directly.
And do this a little bit below, so that the place becomes swollen; Because this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, do not begin the bleeding again, and put on a little bit of oil, because it closes the body's blood, and is mixed in this place the oil that the eye;
and thus administer the oil in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing applies and ointment of them, when it is put on the place; so make it subtle the grease and separate when it is too thick.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens many times, even when it is not bled except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, then haste, and put on the place a sponge moistened in water and some hot, and strain one hour;
and it is necessary that you do these things after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days, no blackening or greening, so it does not harm him. and if you see, put on nothing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamine, mintarstre, or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance at the vein of the basilica:
put therefore your hand on it, and if you find the place soft under the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance bad. Therefore I warn you that you do not put on it anything of what we have said, because by chance in it without the artery;
but the one you make a dry plaster to harden the place, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each one with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red. And if you see it swollen, let it stay until it becomes thinner. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for one who is thin and weak, and needs bloodletting, make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled sparingly and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safer from a decrease in blood and damage to nerves, and is better than bleeding long or widely.
And for one whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give them soft bread with pomegranate juice. If it is feverish, treat it with blood III times or IV. And if it is of cold complexion, give it before the sore a softened bread in syrup of musk, or in syrup of honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
And if it pricks at the vein, after the outflow of much blood, then it behooves him to soak a sponge with broth of flesh and subtle aromatic syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the opening of the vein.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And who wants to empty his arm after the first vein, and he has strong flesh, so he heals seven hours after the first vein, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to bleed from another side, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because it has much blood within the body that is already feverish, and brings fever; so it is necessary to bleed a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it will flow in portions; then that you cleanse all the conditions of the sore, and place your hand upon its poultice when it is healing, so that death does not come in its place with portions, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent;
and it is not proper when you see a separation of the arm, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press upon it forcefully; if it is curved, extend the arm fully, because this would be bad.
but let it rest until it heals the second time; or you will prick it with the tip of the flame, until the vein that is frozen has been opened up, and place on top the piece of cloth put in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not restrain it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity is to draw blood a second time, then in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein emitting from the arm is bled in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing it is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the joint is red;
then be tied moderately so that the vein appears well, then heal it now across, not wide nor long;
and let the opening be wide, and be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood cannot flow out, then put the hand back in hot water, and leave it there until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not bathe the hand in hot water, because one puts it in more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and plunge it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it entirely throughout, it does not grieve anything;
and do not go too far in depth, because the nerves are beneath all bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot issue forth.
And when you will have treated of the blood as much as is necessary, so put on the vein oil and wool to sew firmly, and thus do for each vein.
The vein of him in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have said to you towards the right.
The sap of the sophene is good for all ailments that are below the body, such as diseases of the leg, and retention of flowers, and disease of the hips, and thighs, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of his blood are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it burns, and ties above the joint of the foot. And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins;
So blood is taken from the larger vein, or at the ankle, which is better.
And if you bleed on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and bleed across as when cutting;
and let the flame be unyielding.
And if the vein cannot be released, then put his foot in water, and let it drain well.
And if the bloodletting is needed for the first time, begin the second one above a finger-width, because the flesh is salty;
do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot equally.
The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle of pain, and its hurt is worth to the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
And the qualities of his blood are such that the patient enters into a bath and is strained above the ankle four fingers by twisting, because otherwise he does not open the vein.
And if it opens, let the blood flow in all the ways that you can, and by crossing. and it is better that you cut it, because the veins are dry, and they are very full to hand men.
and it is better that you cut it, because the veins are dry, and they are very full to hand men. And if you do not find it, let the blood flow from any vein that opens or towards the heel of the foot, and toward the little toe, and ward off the nerves;
and make as much bloodletting as you see, and then untie the band, and put cotton on it and strain it. She is now healed.
Cups are made of horns, or glass, or wood.
And ventilation is done according to two manners: or by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this ventilation which is without pricking is according to two manners: or it is done with hot air, or without heat;
and ventilation which is done by pricking and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places of the body, of which one is all in the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others on the two ribs of the neck; and the suction cup below the chin; and the suction cup on the two shoulders; and the suction cup above the knees; and the suction cups in the two arms; and the suction cups on the two legs; and the suction cups on the two ankles;
and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken them at all, as one does with blood from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, as long as the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it must be suctioned, or by habit, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at any time;
for there are such people who when they need to ventilate have a heavy head;
and there are those who bring fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness to the eyes;
and those who bring a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see by blood, and wounds, and deaths, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed after three hours of the day, we command to be ventilated.
The vein of the muse helps with the great pain in the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not right that this should be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in the place of the vein of the cephalic, and it is not right that those who are of cold constitution use it, or who have catarrh, because this does great harm to them;
And for this reason it is not appropriate that the elderly use it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases.
And those who recover from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower down out of fear of obliousness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is worth it to the treatment of pain, and incision of the channel of the throat, and all, and to repletion.
And it is necessary to pull it out carefully, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause blockage in the stomach and heart.
The ventosations at the second ribs of the neck are worth it for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and to strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the vein of the basilica;
And it is necessary that you command the patient to spread his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery and does not come a hemorrhage of blood.
The ventilations of under the chin are good for mouth disease, and for gum rot, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and it is in the place of the healthy lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for the illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The bloodletting of the veins is as good as three veins of the arm because it draws blood from these large veins.
And instruct the patient not to let them be too deeply cut because the vein is naked of flesh and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
The leech which is on the rump is as good as hemorrhoids of the foundation and as diseases below, and it is necessary that the leech be large and of grain so that it has need to well suck. And by chance, if it were subtle, it would break. And it makes large wounds.
The leeches of the legs are applied openly because they draw blood from the whole body and are as good as old pains in the hips, and of the groin, and of the bladder, and soften the tumors.
and they are in place of the two shoulders, and the two ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring pain in many positions.
The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and then succeed temperately, and place it smoothly, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the place red and inflated, and appear the redness of blood.
then fire it, and put back the suction cups, and take care in the arrangement of the bodies, because there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores. if it is necessary to make an incision only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a deep poke. and suck lightly.
And if the flesh is thick, it is necessary to cut twice: The first time to subtilize the way of thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to prick the third time;
And when we want to draw out blood little by little, then we only prick once. And if we want much blood, then we often begin again;
And if the blood is thick, prick it deeper, and the end of this is that the veins are pierced soundly, and it behooves him who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are closed, that you oil their legs with ointments  of oil aperitif and dissolvent: If it is in the estate of skin, with oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of gourd seeds;
And if it is in the estate of summer, with oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take oil of amber, or of balm, or of anise, and similar.
And if the one to whom one is healing has tender skin and large pores, there it does not behoove to put any oil, but it behoves to wash after the ventosation of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, should rise from it, or from water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities should drink from old wine, or from the water of the cypress, or from a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
And they should not apply a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours.
And they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he bathe when he must be cupped, and when he has been cupped.
And guard those who are being treated with cupping if they are choleric, and if their skin is too red and inflamed; then it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with the leaves, and similar things; and minced pigeons, and roast meat, and moist meats.
and minced pigeons, and roast meat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and minced quince, and minced pears and small onions and pigeons;
And on the day that he will be treated, he should drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give to certain men no times triacle or musket before the ventosation, or after, to comfort the principal limbs; and be subtle with the herbs, but it is not proper that those who are hot drink them.
The cupping glasses that are applied without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the knee, and gout, and on the belly and groin and flanks and hip, because these members do not suffer being hurt on themselves, and it is done only to draw blood from member to member, as we put on the breasts when the milk flows.
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and groin to diminish the member.
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place;
And thus it is done when it is placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only so much. And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water to which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup administered to fire is here:
And it should have two sides and half a palm in width, and should have a small hole in the middle of the side, as for inserting a needle, and should be made of silver, so that before it is put on the limb it does not burn the patient;
And in the middle it should have a transverse bar of silver or iron, for placing a burning candle, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the persons who use them.
For the suckings of children are other than those of old people, and of the thin ones than of the fat ones.
And should one thus place this suction cup on the limb:
Taking the candle of wax or linen, and placing it within the suction cup through the rod which is within the suction cup, so that the clarity be at the bottom of the suction cup that it not burn the patient;
And then place it upon the limb, and these must be on the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, then there goes the vapor, and one removes the suction cup;
And take the linen as before, and recommence it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup which is administered in illness of pleurisy, to all acute [illnesses], has no rod nor opening, and is administered only when it is full of water, and is placed upon the limb solely;
and this is the form:
Suctions are not administered except in members where one cannot place suction cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. And in their skinless flesh, such as the two or one and others similar.
and the qualities of the user is that when you find suctions which are in clear sweet waters without  damage, then take them.
and put them one by one in sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be healthy of vein and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the suctions.
And when they will be flat, and fall, if it is their place where one can put a suction cup, put it, because this works well after.
If not, lift the place with ease, and then with water, very well, and then tighten it.
And if their sores are still healing too much after the flesh of the wounds, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water and put it on top, until the wound is healed.
And if the wounds are multiplied, then put crushed vitriol or galena and similar things on top, until they are healed.
Or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them stay there until they dry out on the place, it will now stop.
And if you need more, take other sores.
And if the blisters do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or put a needle there until the blister rises, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will swell;
and when you see that they are bursting, put powder on a bit of aloe and silk ground together, or ash, so now they will heal.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear child, that the fools who look to this chapter and do not see anything in any of the ancient books or letters read;
and because of this reason is held back knowledge in our land, because I never found any good one;
and I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are made, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders it, such as weakness of body, or child, or old man; or if the thread is not very tight, or too cold;
and wear cold clothes, that is to say, cold clothing, and venison, lamb, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have a doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to his first condition that he used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great swelling, or that have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and eggs, and kidneys, and entrails, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For such a cracking of the bone, it takes more time to heal and the fracture is faster
And know that old and decrepit broken bones do not well mend or unite according to their nature for the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of little children;
but if there is a cure, reset the broken bone with the greatest care and join the limb together as it was before; and do not let any point of his work, and for this reason he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or arm, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go to a roll, and others that sharpen like the point of a feather for writing.
For there are fractures that go to a roll, and others that sharpen like the point of a feather for writing. And if with a fracture there is a wound, and a fracture to all a little fissure.
And to each manner of thing have its engine and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes in its place;
and is known the fracture of the bone by that which the parts are twisted, and open well by outside, and sound at the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no torsion nor sound at the touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but it can well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture. If it is not appropriate for you to move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes in arch, and are the II parts disjointed, it behooves them now to put at point equally, so that abscesses come from it.
and if boils come to him, let him not touch them at all until they are quieted;
then set him straight as you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of one who has pieces.
Then restrain him, as it is fitting hereafter.
And if in the bone it is broken in two parts, whether it be hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to one cord and at your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you put back all the additions in their places as best you can, and keep that by your work no harm or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well.
If it is well aligned, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscess hot and contraction of the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, so instruct the patient well that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and watch well that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it behoves to put it in such disposition that it feels no pain;
and watch well that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it behoves to put it in such disposition that it feels no pain; And guard that it is placed straightly, so that twisting does not come when it is restored.
And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is fitting to envelop them in linen wraps that are soft and fine; And those that are thick, such as thighs and legs:
so it is fitting to envelop them in a wide and stiff linen, because the wide linens enclose the entire large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally so that there is no gap.
Then tie bandages lightly around it, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all of the linen, then go above the break and tighten less so that the break is slightly further apart.
and soften the ligament little by little, until you grab a large part of its healthy place, then take back the other ligament, and turn it straight again over the broken place.
then return to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first place above;
then put between the ligaments compresses of linen or cloth, until it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, put on top something that soothes the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days;
then restrain with your splints, and be of half the width of a good-sized cane skillfully cut, or of wood from which they make cleavers, or of palm ribs, and be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the splint put on a fracture be somewhat larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as is fitting to the limb of small or large size; then bind on the splints just as you did in the first hour, then tie them above with thread evenly, as in the first hour above the fracture; tighter is better above, less below;
and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too fine, and be of soft linen;
because if the thread is thick, as I wish in works of fools who make their bandages with cords of twisted linen, and this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have between each splint less than two fingers' width of space.
And if the patient is sore by the joints of the shoulders after the straining in their healthy places, then put beneath them pads of linen, or wool cloth, so that he does not become bruised.
When the wound is with the bruise, and the bones are broken, I will say its cure here afterward.
And know that it does not behoove to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is great, it does not behoove to put splints for after 5 days or 7, or more according to your certainty of abscesses following.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
And it is that you take flour that is held at the walls of the mill, and you combine it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in many ways, and also to women and to small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: Take three pounds each of abrasives, ladanum, rue, asafetida, and gum arabic, ten ounces each. myrrh and aloes, five ounces alechil nine ounces and make it into powder, and mix them with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, he should use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and has helped many men.
Another way of plaster that is good for sprains: take mugwort and wormwood, ten ounces each; myrrh and aloes, nine ounces each; acacia six ounces and boil Armenian bole ten ounces, and grind it well, and mix it with water or the white of an egg, and administer it.
Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that occurs, and those who suffer from bone-setting, and fractures: Take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and oil, and place it on the wound.
This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly removes the pain.
Another method of setting a broken bone: Take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to lessen the remaining pus from an abscess. Take root of vervain, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of quince, one part each;
and grind it, and confiture with wine, and if the limb is burned, confiture with coriander water, or plain water, and use it.
Another manner of splinting more forcefully than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vervain, flax seeds, balm, melilot, and henbane, and violet and chamomile flowers, one part each; And grind, and cook with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hypocrates says in his book that on the broken limb one should put a restorative made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat an injury that is worth pain: Take mugwort and heads of garlic decapitated, or feathers of the eyes, and wormwood, and seal equally, and grind them, and make a poultice with them and apply it.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has their bone moved from its place; then do not loosen it for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest, or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now;
and take light cloth, and damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of the hot abscess.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and remove the pain, then start the fine bandage again, and a little bit of emplastrum, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and be subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is red and painful and swollen, I have removed it completely, and you need to apply a poultice and bandage, if it starts again, as you did the first time.
And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, then do not untie it before after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. and sometimes leave it for XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the alignment of the bone approaches.
therefore restrain it more than before, and make its flesh grow thicker, as I have said before;
and if you see it drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there. apply therefore hot water to it, whenever you loosen it, and every third day, and moisten it a little.
by this method therefore nourishment comes to the limb, and it mends quickly those who foolishly perform the opposite, which leave the limb twisted.
it is bad, and such work is perilous, and I do not see anything else but to let it be and operate it straightly.
Many kinds of fractures there are, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined.
for there are fractures that are made by the thrust of a sword, and the bone breaks all the way to the side which is below the bone, just as it is done with an axe or club. And for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haiche".
When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute";
and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is a blow embedded, or fissure or of collarbone of stone, or of cheek on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound which is rejoined in the bone as subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound which is made either by striking with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone inwards, and the lesion is like that which make the smith when he strikes on the cauldrons; If among the stones within.
And this happens more to those who have soft or damp bones, such as children's bones;
and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like splinters. And I will speak about them in their place.
And let us know all ways of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquiry at tents, and by the rotten cartilage which is upon.
The appearance of the hair capillary is known by those who when one has uncovered the bone, and rubbed against it, so the black fracture appears.
In the cure of a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes is to be red and inflamed, and other similar ones in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you see no danger of accidents, and you hope for salvation, so begin the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
And if it is in this state, so hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day,  so that the tissue under the bone may be corrupted, and come the accident that we have said.
And if the bone fracture reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the fractured part as follows:
and that you shave the head of the patient carefully, and uncover the bone in every way that you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can, and if blood comes out when uncovering the bone, or abscess form, then help with what is necessary, and that you fill the space with soft cloths in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of bleeding cessation; then begin to cut around the bone to remove it, and it is done in two ways of work:
one way is that you cut with a narrow incision before, and this is the form:
And then he puts another piece larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of various widths, some narrow and others wide, and be pointed, and be of iron.
and in working lightly, that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is hard and stiff, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer incisions with chisels, not by force that it does not penetrate beyond the bone of the test, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and you should have many of them, so that each comes in its place from the species of bone, so that you may have targets for all tests.
and this is the form of the three ways of targets:
The quality for perceiving around the broken bone is that you place one target on the bone, and turn to your two (sides) as long as you know that the bone is pierced.
then place the other target elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers.
and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the sac.
And when you have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you reset the apparatus which is dislodged from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tempered and more subtle than the other incisors;
And if there remain nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then lightly lift the bone with instruments; then cure the wound with tents and dressings as we have said.
And the other manner of working is that which Galen says, which is more dry; and it is said to be very powerful, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put below the head of this lens-shaped incisor, because this is its form.
And do not cut from one side, and let the parted be sharp in two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently chop the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane which is underneath.
If it is caught on the bone, gently pull on it, because pulling it easily does not harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to apply that rasping, and remove the flakes with a fine scraper which you must have various quantities, to administer in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If one shaves before with coarse razors, and after with more subtle ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, you must bring about a cause according to its treatment;
And this is something that is not fully replied to by anyone who has put their study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you place a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth. and do this more gently than you can, that you don't hurt the wound, then administer above another linen cloth, and don't bind it too tightly except that it holds the wound alone;
and let him so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lily, and flour of quince, and incense powder, and astrology, and similar things.
and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer other medicines moderate without mortification;
and guard that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment, nor allow it to gather pus, because when pus gathers on the brain tissue, it decays and brings great harm to the patient;
because when one puts on the above mentioned thing mordanting, it corrodes from above. Take therefore, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if pus does not come out forcefully but only from the medicine that has been applied, which has this virtue, then you must take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and glue one cloth, and put it on the wound; then the cure of manners of cures that it is necessary until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the upper bone, or one by itself, are broken because there are two bones.
and that lower one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless forced to bend or twist, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your little finger or pointed finger into the bone and put equal to the broken piece in your index finger, and with the thumb from outside, until the bone returns according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain by your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and it cannot come to its place, then you must set it equal at the head of a stick somewhat thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do this again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then place a poultice on the head with two layers of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put the other (poultice) on the other side, if the fracture is there; And let the layers be so large that they fill the space of the two.
And said any restorer one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the making with eggshell powder and powdered millet; Then leave the poultice, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilage has hardened.
And never put goose feathers in their place, and if the cloth is wrapped around it, and it holds the fracture, and it blows for the patient. or make how you see.
And if a boil comes while you are working on it, put some cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in the place of diaquillon.
And if abscesses come there, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, congealed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, and bind nothing nor the sides;
and if the fracture of the bones is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments to that end, then stitch the fissure, and cure it with things like charred flesh and ointment, and bandages, as suitable plasters and ointments for that purpose;
and if there is no wound inside the bones, then cure it with bandages, and put some pieces of wool in it, until it is healed.
When the jaw is dislocated down, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outwardly so, and not broken in two, except that it buckles inward, if one knows lightly of it.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, put your right index finger inside and gently push the fracture inward, and hold it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension of the two parts, until they are equal.
and if there is a movement of the teeth or a rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and then place on the broken jaw a cerate, and put on top a double bandage. and put on top of the bandage a large splint well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above where you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the shape is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed. and put a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerate.
and put on a light linen plaster, and if the plasters adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is sound many times it heals in III weeks.
And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, rewind that no piece of the bone is removed; if subtle tools are used, suitable for those.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, so sew up the wound if it is wide, and place upon it plasters suitable to those, in order to prevent suppuration, until it be healed.
The shoulder breaks many times before, towards the shoulder blade, and the fracture is according to III manners:
where it is broken and dislocated in II, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore;
or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work if the fracture is without a wound, is that you have II ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken forcele; and the others extend the neck toward the part;
then put each broken piece together so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor displacement.
And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be as large as your necessity. and extend and gently raise the strength, and strain the ball with your hand so that you put each broken piece together as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the humerus with force because it comes in contact, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his arm and put under the shoulder the pillow medium, and throw the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the humerus be lifted.
And then bring the broken pieces together, and if you find them broken, then it is fitting that you cut further;
and try to bring the pieces together gently, and if the bone cannot join for any movement, then cut with one of the incisions you have made; but that you place under the forceps this instrument, to guard the shaft
and seems like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it convenes, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and have two heads, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, like is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are assured of hot abscess, so close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt hot abscess, so apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes to it, then soak the cloth in rose oil and wine, and put it on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of ground meal and yolk of egg, and put light dressings over, and put a sphere under the saddle, if you have need. Then take a very wide band, one palm's width, then put it doubled over the poultice, and fasten it. Then take a slender strip, three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. And place the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the injured shoulder; And reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the head does not move above the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligament loosens, then restrain it;
And make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps put a small cushion under his buttocks, to raise the shoulder higher. So it will lighten the fracture of the shoulder blade by aligning the shoulder. You should bind his arm to his neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days.
Then begin the splint again if you see that he needs it, and restrain it and leave him so until it is restored.
And it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in fewer for no man.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or gets wide open in the middle, and it is known only by touch.
if you set the bone according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.
then put on top of the place powdered flour with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on top a double cloth. then put on top a wide and subtle board, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the edge of the board is chafing in any place of the shoulder, then use that hair (or fiber) for bandages of linen so that the board sits evenly.
and then restrain it with a whole great band firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the linen every day.
and every time it loosens, restrain it, and put the bone back in its place if it is out of position, and lay the patient on their side.
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And when this number is accomplished, untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that moves easily out of place.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, do it as above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the thigh to appease an abscess hot.
of the breaking of the foot
The bone sometimes breaks in the middle, but it happens rarely. but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken in the middle, it sinks down to the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alacrity, and thirst, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the seams in the broken bone, and he feels all bad.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and you put one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of the two ribcages with your hands, and subtly try to set it in every way that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
Then put on plasters and poultices above the subtle salt cloth, or another light cloth, and wrap it in a bandage, and place it on the broken bone so that it does not move. And turn the limb around to the back, and restrain it tightly, and reward each hour the bandage, and if it softens, tighten it.
And if it is necessary to loosen it, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, remove the plaster, and address what has come there with ways of treatment;
Then reapply the bandage, and restrain it until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick part after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are brittle; and he feels it well at the examination as two.
And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly as it should be. And then put the splint, and restrain it with a strap, if you need it.
And if the rib fracture is declining inwards, the patient feels great pain and a sharp sensation, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and besides pain, and coughs and vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a grievous ailment, and the ancients have put great effort into it.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, in order to expel the wind outward.
We do not perform this, except abscesses are present if they have not arrived. And if it has come to him, heal it.
And they said any of you should apply cupping to the area, to suck out the pus and this seems reasonable; Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping draws away superfluous substances from the area because of weakness.
And they say none of us should cover the place with soft wool in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the wound even, then it is cured by the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone piercing the lung, and there is doubt about the patient, it is necessary to cut above the site of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under the instrument in order to guard the wound;
And therefore one must dig the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if a boil comes, put it on cloths moistened in rose oil, and put it on the spot;
and treat while the place of that which is fitting for the boil, and lie still on his side or where it should be, until it is healed.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if he will be healed or not, if you take notice if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing.
Know that it is mortal in many positions, and if they move and feel well when they are restrained and pulled, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one puts care to it.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take notice if his feet are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on his back there is windiness and involuntary excretion;
and when one is healing it upon his belly, there jumps forth an evacuation without volition. And when it is set on its back and he wants to sit, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor well in its care.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, so place upon the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is appeased;
then put upon one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a linen bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone becomes disjointed, then it is necessary to cover upon the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then cure it with ointment that incites flesh, until it is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", put your pouch in your left hand, and make it even with the other hand as you can, then put the splint and support on top, if you need it;
then restrain it, and if there are bones displaced, set them in place, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Sometimes it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there may be only a little bit of lessening at the head; and then it lengthens and leans towards the outside, and comes to the patient pain in that place, and prickling, and swelling where it breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the fracture; and know which are the fracture and the form of them;
and if the fracture is in the head alone, then set the fracture even, as long as it is in natural form.
And if the fracture is long, or it bends inwards, then make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you. And when you have set it even, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of cork, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move;
and apply the weight under the ribs, as long as the ligament is even. And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes there, then do not touch it, as long as the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident.
Of the fracture of the shoulder
The assistant is what is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the two ways:
one of which is that you take a thick rod of wood, according to this form:
And tie the two heads with two bindings, and bend them upward, and set the patient on the seat;
then lay the broken arm on the rod, until it reaches the armpit, and has in its middle a curve of wood, then place on any heavy thing or the ministers stretch it downward;
then put the two ends of the fracture together with his hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his bed, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands his ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below to all the limb, and extends each one to his part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, restrain the linen below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each minister to its side.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one binding below the armpit, and the other toward the elbow, below the fracture;
And also if the fracture is towards the outside, it is necessary to put the splint lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equal on the surface and on the outside.
Then set the fracture as it should be, and restrain it, if a boil does not come there.
And if a boil comes there, do not restrain it until the seventh day, and put on moistened linen in oil of roses, until the boil is appeased.
Then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and put the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder and on the arm so that the arm is in a straight line, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one finger's width of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three fingers on each side;
Then bind upon the splints, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, tighter and less spreading outward.
And if you see the placement of the splints, and the binding, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it bound up until the seventh day, as we have said;
Then look at the joint every three days, that it does not itch or swell, or that the nurse can come to the limb for this reason because it is too sore. If the direction, as we have said.
And if none of those accidents come, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach.
and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool equally, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or is softened the ligatures.
If you address him by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is first finely ground. And when he begins to recover, it should be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days from all; and then one must unbind it and administer baths and medicaments of ointments for the place to be healed.
And if the constriction is ugly and entangled, it remains to untie for one or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fossils," because one is small, and that is the one that follows the armpit;
and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little toe;
By chance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing.
And when the large ones are broken, so is the healing bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.
If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended, and set straight.
And if it's the large bone, then it should be restrained more strongly.
And place it on the cushion and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other bones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor.
Then extend the ministers (ministers) of his arm to the underside of his hand, or to the linen, and some other ministers to the other above.
And then place the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if any are severed that grip the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it up with bone as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with the fracture, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; If you take care of it.
And if in the beginning of the restoration boils appear, then glue a patch of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft. and cover the patch gently, until the boils are appeased.
And then remove the cerote, and put the ointment of ground flour with abundance of egg on it, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the splint be more to the outside, and a little wider than the others.
And know that it must have six bandages or arms in more ways. whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
And bind more above the fracture than elsewhere, and all days less away from it, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. and let the bandages that are on the wound be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
and let the bandages that are on the wound be soft and moist, and not hard or rough. and let the thread, with which it is stitched, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb in hot water until the itch is appeased.
and let the limb not be too tightly bandaged resting.
And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loose and the bones out of place, and similar things, so address it.
And take care if the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too far away, then you must soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the nourishment comes back, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not unbind him until XX days.
Or if he does so then let him place his hands to his neck, and let his arms be level, and beware of movement and fidgeting, and sleep on his back.
And know that this wound is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, according to the constitutions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on our wrists many fractures occur, and there comes nothing but swelling many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient lie crossed, and be straight in front of him equally.
Then put his hand on the board stretched out, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and put them equally the eyes, until they are well joined.
And put the plaster and the bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place. And be enveloped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the end of the hand toward the belly, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken hand. and then the constraint of a long cloth, and let the star of the heart be as large as the palm of the hand, and the constraint, as it is necessary.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and make the bandage tight between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of our two sides, if it is the pouches, set it equal, as it is necessary. and restrain with the palm, and if you see to put a small straight star to raise the fracture, and do not move it.
and if the fracture is to the other two, as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and tie it with the healthy joint which is after. or you tie them all in I holding, that much worth, or you put on a star, as in the pouch;
and take ward in the restoration and in the arrangement of hot abscesses, and cure those that come, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns forward and backward.
and the restoration if is done by tying one above the fracture, and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his tie evenly;
and this is when the fracture is joined of the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, so one of the ligaments toward the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the tie be below the knee, and let the extension be downward;
then put the mirages bone evenly with his two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the tie, if an abscess does not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it be appeased then return to your work and your cure; The ligament is made in such a manner.
It is necessary that you encircle the fracture with a rigid bandage doubled in II or III, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread upward.
Then turn upwards on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put above the fracture splints, and put a splint above the bone of the leg;
Then employ the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal pressure, then begin to bind in the form III twists or IV above the fracture; And when you go higher above the fracture, and less restrain it;
Then feel for the two bones of the thigh that you have put between the leg and the hip, and in part III are the small bones above, then go back down to the bottom of the thread, until you reach near the foot.
and restrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that there comes no abscess or swelling nor any other sign. And if it happens there, untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times.
and if there are pieces of bone that grasp, then it is necessary to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place and drain pus. and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken like this, when it is set, like in the shoulder or arm.
Nevertheless, with restoration done like this, it does not help the patient.
And knows that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Know that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is no longer just a fissure, or perforation, and it happens to every wound, and without wound, and this one feels well.
And the restoration is done by putting equal those things that are rounded to their sides, as long as they can be assembled and moved together.
Then put the splint on it and put a round piece of wood inside if you need it, and restrain it as is fitting, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like a hot poultice and something similar. And put to each accident what is fitting for it, until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "the fibula," and the other is called "the tibia."
And there happens every breakage as it comes to the arm, and for that reason, the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all here. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the small bones are broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen well; and it turns downwards.
Therefore administer extension, and put it straight, and tie the splints equally;
but nevertheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have accomplished your work entirely, take two strips of  wooded splint that support the leg on one side and the other, and be the length of the leg from the knee down below;
then wrap it in two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and with this bandage, the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good.
and no one should administer anything to the long bone of the leg, and if it is broken, put on the leg in order to ward off movement, and this is properly done in the fracture or where there is a wound.
and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; if it cures as long as it is healthy.
of the breaking of bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot come at any time fractures and to two points, and there have been further than in more postures.
And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones overlap each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places;
Then put the splint and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small board at the two shoulder blades, then restrain it to the foot carefully, then that you have wrapped with cloths around, and other things which you need.
And when III days or IIII will have passed, then untie the linen, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and be one point more wide, then put under the foot that board that I have said, and restrain it carefully;
And if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and restrain the board under the foot; And let it stand on the top of the board further out under the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have said them. and treat each accident as it is fitting.
Of the break of the bone of the finger
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, set it standing wide open, then incline it to the back part, and have it held by the back;
then fill the hollow of the woman's body with cotton, and put in as much as I stand for;
then lift the woman up, and raise her back gently, gently, and then push the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the body, and return the bone with the stand;
and when she wants to urinate, take away the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or around: then the fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a sheep bladder, and tie a string to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the string end, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of a man or a woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the bone of the hip;
and these fractures near are not hidden from him who sets his study and practice to it, and understands my book.
For the fracture signifies to more than one disposition the right way of restoration: Therefore, then.
In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the thigh; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it there for three days or until it is healed, and it will be healed without haste.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the wounds that we have said testify to them.
And if the wound heals, keep the vitriol there, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the broken bone that same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
And if abscesses come there, let the restoration remain until the ninth day, so long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it neither on the third nor on the fourth day, for you would make it come bad accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then it behooves you to set it gently with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not ready for you to put it even with your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this purpose you must make sure that it is impregnated with three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of fracture;
and be round and about an inch thick, so that it does not bend at the compression on the limb during your work, and be blunt in front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And is called "palangin," for which the head of the bone should be placed on top of the apparent bone. And bring it together at once, until it returns, and are equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it behooves you to chop the head of the bone, until the instruments have purchase.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for this, or scalpel or saw, to your power;
then raise what is remaining in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
So do until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage with black wine stich and properly if this is in situation; and do not put anything on the wound, other than to which there is oil, lest it cause decay and corruption.
then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself good guard that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
and many times have these things happened to the foolish people, and they have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time; And let the constriction be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may occur there, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it does not behoove to put upon stars. but wrap around, in place of stars, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, remove what you have placed on top of all the wine, and put ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmasion and similar.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone comes down gently.
And if for many days it passes and it cannot be mended back in place, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must close the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death may come from it, but let it be until it will heal itself;
perhaps after twenty days or thirty it will fall by itself, then you can cure the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it so.
We come often after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance, he cannot do the natural works of his limbs.
Take guard therefore if it seems to us fresh: if he administers medications astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acai, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and you confit them with astringent wine or with yolk of egg or with honey; and place them on the wound as poultices, and bind it well, and do not separate it in hands for days;
and place them on the wound as poultices, and bind it well, and do not separate it in hands for days; and then unwrap it, and begin another one, as long as the swellings are removed;
or you restrain upon a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs;
and if the swelling has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then make a cut above, and bring the superfluity to appear. or you apply it to a certain razor, until it is removed, and the wound heals.
of the member which is weak after healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterward the limbs weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason being because it was bound too tight, and not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and the blood supply could not come to the limb; or by a multitude of blows; or by too great movements, not at its proper time; or because he has little blood in his body, he is weak
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him. and administer baths to him, and give him joy and ease;
then put the poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the rose often with warm water, until the swelling corrects to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
After health, the crooked limb When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function:
so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death.
However, if the knots and the tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be risen with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of balm, and roots, and melilot, and similar things.
and apply a softening plaster, such as diachylon well made, and take the mucilage of balm, and confit it with fat of goose or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top.
or you take figs, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And sometimes dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. And let there be movement to the limb every hour.
And if the torments are old and hardened, like stones, and there is a need to remove them with iron, then it is necessary to cut to the bone, with a subtle incisor lightly. and put cushions and study in the cure.
Dislocation is an issue from any joint of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly formed, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, then it is necessary now to bring back without tarrying.
For if one delays, then the limbs swell, and by chance if one sets it back with force;
for this it is not necessary to move it when it is inflamed many times brings pain and other aches;
However, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then let him be, as long as the abscesses are calmed;
then raise the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as they come back to their place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to II manners: or they are a little out of place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chin, and close the saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by many disarrangements.
And if it is whole and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it carefully, and do not hesitate at all.
And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put his fist into the pocket from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to make them equal.
And command the patient that he soften his mandibles and move them in all directions. And the member is placed evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back with a grip, even if it is the two mandibles together, then apply hot water and oil, until they are gently reset.
Do not hesitate about resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening, then place a moistened cloth on a felt made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bands.
And the patient sleeps on his back, and his shoulders be standing between two pillows, so that he does not move them to the right or to the left, nor does he make any effort to speak, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed.
And then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not make any effort to open his mouth when eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the two jaws cannot be set back in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and familiar fevers come, and perhaps a bowel rupture, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is a peril. And many times die those who have it, in nine days.
The wrench cannot dislocate from within the ribcage, continuing into the flank, and it is dislocated no times outwardly, and one feels this well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the place with the palm of your hand, and it will return.
then place on the splint and the bandage, and restrain.
and the shoulder which is towards the side cannot dislocate. if it does, and if it dislocates again at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said.
then place on the splint and the bandage, and restrain it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
and in the same way, bring back the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in only three ways:
of which one is that it dislocates towards the hip. and the second is towards the chest; and by chance, it dislocates upwards, and this happens rarely.
And do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nerves.
And many times it dislocates downwards towards the seat, even to those who have little flesh, because at them it is felt harder;
To those who have enough flesh, it jumps with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And by chance it happens to some men a percussion or fracture, and inflates the shoulder with a hot abscess, and believes that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore it behoves that you prove it, as long as you are certain of it; And then begin the cure.
And it is known the dislocation when it is pulled downwards towards the seat, and puts a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; And you will find at the top of the shoulder a pit, and below the seat touching the top of the shoulder, as if they were one piece; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor move it in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you can clearly feel it by touch;
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is healthy.
And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their hands under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it downwards; so they come together gently.
And if it does not come together as we have said in hand shortly after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; And the minister soothing and comforting ointment, as decoction of altea and fennel and melilot in water, and be administered.
Then be the patient laid on his back, and put under his buttock a piece of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then place his heel on the cloth, and lift the shoulder's head gently, and draw the hand of the ill.
And another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; That shoulder returns now all, and if you see so reset it according to this manner:
and that you make be present a man who is greater than the sick. and be straight toward the ribs, and push the shoulder below the seat of the sick, and lift the seat up, so that the sick person hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the sick downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, he may put with him any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner:
and is on puts a long stick in the earth, whose head be as also as the post, and be neither too thick nor too slender; Then let the patient lie down, but that he have coverings on top of him, and the patient be standing by the long staff.
Then let his hand be stretched out to one side forming, and the joint will return to its place readily;
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: Take a piece of wood from the arm of great size and four inches wide, which has the head rounded to enter through the bottom of the sleeve, according to this form:
Then tie on top of the staff coverings so that the staff does not bruise the patient, then place it under the sleeve of the patient;
And extend his arm on top of the long staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm at the end of the hand, then place the arm on the edge of a plank of large size, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang down from the other side: The joint returns now.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behooves you to put under the shoulder cap a ball of wool even, then put the plaster sprinkled with powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder evenly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he exercise little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal more quickly;
and then he should exercise more after seven days or so, and move it; And if it is hardened and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is displaced from its place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then you must administer cautery to it in three places, as it is shown in the chapter of cautery.
And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breast, or back, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there are administered other places;
and care until it is sound.
And if after healing pain comes to the limb, and gradually in movement, so the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is soothed, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the cost
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated often and frequently returns.
and it is dislocated from all sides, both front and rear, and the dislocation is not well set, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the blade with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as the abscess comes, because if the abscess comes, it would be harmful to reset it;
and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the rear; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to both hands; And his arms be spread out, and the hands do touch according to the knife around, in front and behind, and push the joint to its chest together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and grasps the root of the palm with his knife that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it tight so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm from each side, then that you have enveloped a double cloth long and wide;
and when the fingers have joined the joint to its hand, then the oil of any oil for softening the joint, then push the joint firmly together, until it returns;
and when it is in place, then put on a dry plaster with a drop of egg white, and hold it firmly together, and lean the arm to the neck of the patient, and let it for some days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the ligament, and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not well set, start again with the splint and the ligament, and leave it for some days, until it is firmly set. Then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press it until it is soothed. or you put on the joint a wool fleece, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and make him enter a bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put on the fleece again, and then into the bath. And thus do it two or three times until it is healed.
and if you see it, put on top fine cloth moistened with hot butter, and keep it pressed.
It will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easier than other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place carefully, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limbs do not swell, or that an abscess comes hot.
And the return is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the ministers the hand, and carefully place it equal, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; then put the diseased one's back of his hand on a table at extension and return. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, the patient puts the back of his hand on the table, and the helper puts his hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is well. If not, then strain with soothing plasters the abscess, and leave it so without recommencing.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, then the joint remains crooked.
and does not harm the patient except that as long as his hand is weak, and cannot pull anything at all. therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the artery;
if there is no other thing to do except to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then hold it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and let it be as such.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, apply the hot water cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the bones of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or the belly;
therefore are the bones, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the bone, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for a day, and then put it straight again that day;
and bandage it, as we have said, and unbind it every day, and make it move, and then re-bandage it.
and do this often, until it is straight, and also do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
and also do so, when it is dislocated from another place.
of the dislocation of the spine
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs of this are that the members jump away without will, cannot hold them, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one.
And many times it moves the shoulder in four parts.
That which moves at the back is called "gilbosite":
The cure of this is that you reward oneself if the "gilbosite" comes from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing at all.
And those which come from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said there were ways of treatment with great words, where there is little profit in all.
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling which comes to the breast before, nothing heals.
And also that which comes directly in the two sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient be stretched on his face in the equal place, and have a strain below him, that he does not move.
Then insert the tinder at the head into the earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a linen around below the buttocks of the patient, and the other to the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and the minister knows the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bones.
and be well closed, the bone as we have said, and the minister puts his palms upon the spine, forming a shape, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and place it under the shoulder, and let the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the shoulder, then put the middle of the board upon the spine; and let the minister place his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place;
And if you see, do so with the turnip that turns in the hand. And it is that you put two bones at the head of the patient with one arm long, and towards the feet, other two, and have between each bone, above and below, a palm's width of length;
and have in each stick a hole, or the turning goes, and be the sticks firmly in earth, so that they do not move.
and between each two sticks have one turning stick, so that the line turns, and have in each turning two small sticks of a palm long, to turn the turning.
and then tie the line which is among the axles to the turning towards the head, and the other line towards the feet to the other turning, and each of the ministers turns his turning on the whole line, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the splints, and then the strip of a tablet of three fingers long, which covers the place of the vertebra and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a line as we have said, and use the patient to subtle nourishment, until he is healed;
and if any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the method that we have said before. and sometimes it is administered a piece of sponge, and sometimes it appears in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation. and it is the bone that opens, therefore one must not have presumption there. for adventure would bring death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and do not come out like other joints.
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parts: inside and outside, and front and back;
and more inside then, and poco dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens wider the knee of the injured than the healthy one, and the injured person cannot double their knee. And it is the limb that is below swollen with abscess heat, because of the coming of the hip joint.
And the sign of him to whom it comes to the fever, so is this accident contrary to these before.
And the signs of one who has this in front, it is that they are well their leg according to completion; However, they do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make them walk, they cannot before, and retains their urine, and swells the groin, and when they go, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him who has it in back, is that he cannot extend his knee nor double, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip joint is in place below the ribs.
The return of this kind of dislocation is that you notice if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no cure; And he should not have presumption there.
And in this one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of IV manners of dislocation, so hasten that you return the joint, and the extension within and without, and the movement to the right and left; For perchance it will return, and there is no need for other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare the minister strongly, and extend the leg strongly with two hands, or on the linen that is tied above the knee; and other ministers extend their hand above in such a manner that they push their hands under their shoulders, then the tighten with a linen band above the hips; and another grip the head of the linen.
and extend upward and downward all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not done, it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
When the dislocation is at the edge, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy rib, then put the linen on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the linen upward toward the groin, and towards the strong muscle.
then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased hip, and extend it outward. Then it will return to its place now;
and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen cloth above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
Then let it be hung from the top of a pole, and be above the ground two arms long;
Then command the minister to embrace the head of the groin, and let another minister be hanging with the sick person, who embraces the groin firmly, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has gimpiness, and restrain the linen on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also;
Then put two sticks, one at the top and the other at the feet, then stick a stick between the hips of the sick person in the middle; And have the patient wrapped in damp cloths so that he does not feel cold, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeon puts his hand into the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If it is not, place on, that is, a table, and press as we have said in the chapter of the boil, and the patient lies on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as much as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the surgeon's palm above the sick angle, then press with the other hand, and pull it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the sick one down, nor raise it up on the ground, but rather that it should be as if the hip had been dislocated backwards, as we have said about lying on the two hips; And be upon its face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table. And it will be pointed when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even. Then adjust the hips, and put the splint, and the band of bandage so that the hip does not move. And rest three days or four, then untie it, and put the splint on top.
And if you see that they are even, so bandage, as before, and leave it three days.
Then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: That is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards.
and do not dislocate again
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if he does not hold it at his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his leg at his hip lightly;
and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest at the hip, and keep them together tightly for three days or four, then untie it;
and let the patient not try to walk, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
The resetting is light, and one should extend it gently with his hands when it is only softened.
And when it is dislocated completely, then you should make the patient sit straight, and hold him firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then take the foot in your right hand, and then in the left twice, then push it upward, and gently push the foot upward;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
If it returns, that is well;
if not, begin the work again, for it will return.
And if it cannot return like this, so do to guide the patient onto their back on the ground, and stick a pail firmly in the ground between their hips, and tie blankets around, that it does not cold the patient.
Then grasp the ministers the hip, and another minister extends the foot to their hands or to the linen, that it ties above the neck of the foot. Then extend each minister equally, and the pail should be placed between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when it is extended.
Then put the ministers equally the dislocation in their hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return gradually.
And when it is in place, so put the plaster and bandages on top, and hold firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the linen is not too tight.
Then let him leave it for two or three days, and if the bonds soften, then strain it.
Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come there, then it is fitting that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, then you should make the patient sit on a level surface or on a table perfectly straight, and place your foot upon what is apart from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is aligned and there is nothing apart from it, then place beneath the sole of the foot a board two fingers wide, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it. and let him rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
So be not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold;
and use at the beginning soothing things to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb now, so that the hot abscess may come;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat the wound as befits it, with dry dressings;
And if it is accompanied by a fracture, and fractured bones are dislocated, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it brings you harm according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body.
