O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine in full, and have made an end through its explanations and through its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I accomplish this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is strengthened in our region and is strange throughout all, so it has perished the science and has been cut off, and there is nothing left of its forces than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this came the errors and the vanities, and minds are closed and science is banished.
It seems to me that I will revive it along with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation. And I will come along with the forms of the implements of cautery and other instruments of the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine lengthened. And it is necessary for him who deals with it to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the articulation of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and the separations of veins, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of origin.
And for this Hippocrates says that the name alone with the name is much, but with the work little. and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things previously mentioned, should beware lest he fall into error and injure men.
As many times as I have seen, more than those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and experience.
For I saw a fool cut an abscess of scrofula or goiter from a woman's neck and cut her arteries in her neck. Because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And see another case who treats a stone from a man's age, and the stone was great; if he carried it out with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called for the treatment, and see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I well know that if one cut it he would die.
And see another case who took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound;
and the ignorant surgeon brought the fracture over the wound to the stars with a very strong ligature, and did not leave any ointment on the wound, and left him thus in the end;
and he commanded him that he should not untie it.
and so the leg remained swollen, and the foot, and came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and hurried to come loosen the leg; and when I loosened it he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all ways the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it;
and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb until the limb was altogether lost.
And see another wound that opens an abscess, and then inflames because of the malice of its master.
For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into II divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that the foolish onlookers cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised;
and leave the diseases treatable to good health;
And remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other one of glory.
Gaulish says in some of his admonitions: Do not take care of any illness, unless you are called a fool."
I have divided this treatise according to III chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet;
and of the forms of the instruments, and of the handles of the cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and probing, and about blisters and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things.
and the chapters are ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it befits me to say the quality of the aid and of the discomfort of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help, and of harm, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret replies;
and of this they spoke the most wise men, and agreed to it;
and I suffice myself with few words, because I fear length.
I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions or it has matter, except for those complexions: This is to know hot constitution by means of matter, and dry constitution by means of matter.
In hot and dry constitution altogether matter, they said none and said that cautery there is great help; and the other said the contrary: that cautery does not worth to disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured of a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness;
and said he who says the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this word. For I have found it never once by experiment.
And in every way, let no one intercede besides he who has proved it, and who knows by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space of time;
Of other complexions we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the masters assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that fire cautery together is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come out further than to the member that is burnt, and does not harm any other member except for this one.
The hot medicines come from one limb to another by distancing, and bring to the limb diseases of grievous healing; and perhaps it harms the patient.
Fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I keep you from the secret which is answered in fire, and the quality of the work, how it displaces the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; receive him in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be made, and how long they are held.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times because the harms coming from it are lessened by the help of the cautery. And even if the cautery is for necessary pains, outside and until they cannot endure the time that greater harm does not come to the limb.
And never think about it, dear child, as foolish people do; because the illness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus;
and they say thus; but it is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the haste of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And it is a most important thing that the patient comes at some point according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the illness and its virtue;
And are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand at all for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth.
Therefore it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish men.
The ancients said that cautery instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance.
and they said that the burns of the cautery do not cause rot, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some men.
and gold cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they say. But nonetheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools very quickly.
and if one heats it too much; as they do to fire; and thus there is enough risk of hindrance.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the foot, so that the way is easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two kinds made because of a sickness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and also for all maladies which come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the dose III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can endure. and then make go back the head of the sick one.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands over his thighs;
after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs will come, if it bleeds then scavenge the cautery which is called “olivare,” for this is its form; And put it on the place marked with ink, and do descending and pulling your hand peck and peck turning; then lift your hand slightly, and return to the place if you see the bone one small; and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
after take one peck of sail, and put in soft and moist cotton inside, and put on the place, and let him leave it for 3 days;
After place on top of the leg soft in butter; and leave on until the burning is gone; after treat the wound of the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healed.
And they say the ancients, that when more stays open the wound, more it purges; and for this reason so help moves.
And they said any of these that one must leave the cautery so that part of the bone is burned, and then one should reset what is burned of the bone, and be healed.
And they say the other one must the cautery so leave on, and push so hard that it lowers the bone as wide as the whorl that women put in their spindles for those that the humors come out moved;
and one must leave the wound long open; after that one must cure and soothe.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear;
and I seem to him that I should leave it;
because the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members;
and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salved and quicker for me, and from this I operate in these matters altogether salvation.
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cauterization that we have said before, and it is not effective. Take ward if the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; therefore the cauterize those below that cautery we have said above. After make cauterize on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cauterize where it is called "vessels"; and there are them in which one puts suction cups; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone; the patient feels much more great pain in this cauterization than the others, and I will speak of it later;
and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those where one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form;
Of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the patient up to the eye, and the head is purged by medicinal fluids, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of the diseases, and all this does not help; Therefore I make cautery in two manners, that is to say of hot medicine and of fire.
The cautery of hot medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and remove the bark and cut it into two pieces, as small as the head of a pin, and then make a hollow in the temple where the pain holds, in such a manner that you can place the piece of alum beneath the skin.
And when it is placed, bind it well and leave it thus for twelve hours. And then unbind it and carefully remove the piece of alum, and leave the wound thus for two or three days. Then place a poultice soaked in butter on top until it heals.
After this, cure with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see that it needs any other medicines burning which I have written or otherwise treated of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is made in this manner. Heat the cautery with this form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or it has the point of curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance.
And place it in the painful place, and hold your hand and press the fire a little bit, until the half of the thickness of the heart is burned.
And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows an abundance of blood.
After put cotton in the shape of wool, and place it on the spot for three days. Then you put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare," at all the tip, and you keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of maladies, and it profits not, and see that the cauteries before said of the medicine and of iron do not suffice him, then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery which is called «cultellare» until it be white;
And thus rule upon the place ailing a line of half a digit of long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come until the bone;
And guard the mandible that moves when one manipulates it, and the nerve not be irritated except only to the moving and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against flowing of blood from the artery when it shall be cut, or cutting has great fear and especially to him who does not know it, and who is not studying and experienced; and let the work be in mid way;
but I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the center as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called “point”, for this is its form:
After prick all around the ear of the sick person, or where the pain is held in both, and move away a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn; and have X points near each ear;
after curing the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torments that must be cured by cautery are few except for those that move phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
and do not make cautery on likenesses that come from dryness and nerve spam.
When you cure this likeness of torment that moves phlegm from the eyes and expulsions of the head and gargles, and this is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with III cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point outside the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the II lips;
and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let it cauterize the place on the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one thumb; and let the cautery remain so long as the middle of the heart is burned.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the likeness of the cutter that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it should be that the blade is a little larger;
after care its place as I have said before, as long as it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make IV cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and I remove the head, and I put it where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that modify the brain;
After the king has treated the head of the sick person completely, and he places on the back of the head a cataplasm of mustard as is written in the treatise of plasters;
And this is the manner of the cautery: if the fire if done as I have said.
If it is healthy this way, good is; and if it isn't, then do three cauteries of the head, descending to the neck, and have a space between each cautery one finger-width thick;
and cure it as the others, and if you see it needs to be added, and the patient is suffering, then do one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, II others on the II horns, and treat until it is healed.
and let the cautery which is called 'olivare', as I have said before.
It is necessary that the chief be purified of herbs and things that we have said before;
after having anointed the head of the sick man, then make cautery at the center of the head and on each horn, and the last one and III on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is advanced, then make IV cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after treatment until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called 'olivare' that we have said before
of epilepsy
The epileptic should not use fire cautery except the one who is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from bad medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make gargarismes for them and chewing, often changing the brain with good meats.
After the king's head in the middle, and I make the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn. And if the patient is weak and suffering, make cautery as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is feverish, make the cautery subtle according to this manner:
When because of melancholy are the superfluities or the humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then the cautery of teals cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After the king's head of the patient; After that, make a poultice of flax well done, also as the circle, put it in the middle of the head.
And the patient sit crossed, and be well held on all sides
After present the linen, and worths moves of butter of goat ancient. And the warmth to fire temperately, so that the two if one puts him may suffer. After empty the circle by within remove the chief, and let it cool;
And do this to patient each week once with other good government, until it be healthy.
Or if you see him being cauterized by making more than one burn to all of the cautery.
This manner of cautery moistens the brain importantly;
And then puts above cotton moistened in butter and grease of gelling.
of the opening of the eyes When the ache comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
After he commands to rear his chief, and he does cautery removed the chief, and he does II cauteries on the II temples if the descending of the awe is at the II eyes together, or in I if the descending is in I;
And cut at all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and be the cautery long according to the width of the temple;
And guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, then staunch it with the power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how to staunch it.
and at no time is cautery or a hatchet used below the two bones behind.
and one sees that these are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes. I cauterize in the middle of the head, and two cauterizes on the two temples, and two cauterizes where a hatchet is used below the two bones. and if need be more, cauterize it carefully above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
When you medicate him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit, then give the patient three crushed nuts to drink; afterwards make an incision on the head, and do a cautery or middling olive-oil cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called 'clavilis' on the two eyebrows, one slightly under the hair.
and beware of the artery so that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called «olivare». of this the form is
And if you see, make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not let go of your hand except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
Hair which pricks the eye At times it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one does cautery according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are equal, then put the patient in a sound place; after which upon the paper of the eyes draw a figure like that of the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign next to the hairs;
then put moistened cotton in egg white and parsley juice on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked point and point many times, so that the hairs are burned at the place.
And the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye.
Then lift your hand, and leave it so for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after the ointment cure until it is healed.
And if after these, the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cauterizing on that same place, just as you did first;
And if the hairs are burned out, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the hair the eye.
The cauteries of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Then take French soap and live coal, of each one ounce, and grind together well. And make it hot, so that it does not cool down, then spread on the form as you have made it like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the paper over the eyes. And if the patient holds only in one eye, then one should work in that one, and if in both. And put under the eye cotton moistened in water of an egg;
And the head of the patient be in your healthy hand and put your back showing over the medicine, and press it and  squeeze all times that the patient feels a burn from the medicine, because he feels a burning as of fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine to your right. And when the burning will have passed, then lift the place of the eye, and look if you see the paper lifted as if it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision. and if so, then so much the better.
If not, it is again put in the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set.
then put on moistened cotton in butter until the burns are closed, then treat the place of the ointment which is called “diphanos” and others, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary, that you be careful with your work, by great care that it does not fall of the medicine into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before. then treat it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constrictions;
and let not the right way be restored to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the cure of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head in a sound position. And hold his head between your hands in such a way that he does not move or tilt his head.
After, put moistened cotton in the white of an egg or in juice of parsley on the eye;
After, heat the cautery that is such.
And when it is heated, put it to the head like the form of a quill feather, so that the cautery is together.
If you see it, so be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see it, so be as a tent.
But nonetheless, this which is shaved is worth more for your work.
After press the fistula if it is opened, and clean out the rot, and dry it. And if it is closed, so work it, and clean out fiercely the bowel.
After put upon the hot cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the skin under the eye, that your hands do not make folly. And put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If this is not, so begin again the cautery once more, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for three days.
After I put on cotton moistened in butter, and the cure of the desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass that it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicinal ointment until the bone is uncovered. and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said. Listen to a fistula, and cut it open. After put in the split a subtle camel of which this is the form: and it is made to the quantity of one third of an ounce; and hold your hand or camel firmly, and let the patient not move in any way that the melted lead does not run into his eye;
and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in vinegar or in honey;
the ulcer if it is in its place of fistula, and the whole by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer ointment to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
of the punctures in lips Many times, there are crevices in lips called "hairs," and also in the lips of children.
When you treat these wounds of those that we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then apply the small scalpel cautery according to this form.
And he places it carefully in those crevices until it comes to the bottom.
After curing the place of carbuncle until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the tongue or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and grown and is emptied and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not profit at all. then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula. after the bot or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cauterizes to the bottom of it, and its last place.
and do thus once or II, after the cure of what we have said in cures, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if this is not the case, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and that is not effective, then put the chief of the patient in your hand; after sharpen the cautery whose form will come after here in this manner that you put a chain on the tooth;
and put inside the cautery hot carefully, and hold so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lift your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will;
after fill the patient's mouth with saltwater, and let it stay for an hour and rinse well.
And in such a manner the tooth that was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture corrupted dries.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, where there is cold or dampness, and the cures of medicine are not helpful, then there is need for cautery according to two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cauterization of butter is such that you take butter of calf fat, and the end in a spoonful of iron or steel; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moistened wool and cotton in butter cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and put on top the hot iron until the fire comes to the end of the tooth.
The cautery assembled with fire is such that you prick a piece of iron or steel, and it should be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person.
After heating the cautery, because its shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this often, because the pain will be removed that day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the heat of this cautery, and then raise it forcefully.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever shape you want, and according to what you are able.
and this is the shape of the iron:
Of the scrofulous ulcers When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize the head with fire as it comes after this form, and let it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery to the other part.
And put the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, put cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for III days; And put on moist cotton in butter as long as the burn is removed.
After care the place with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the humors overcome on the channels of the body, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines;
After the fire cautery is done at the root of the throat, and you guard that you do not come near the throat, and burn only a little bit.
After the fire cautery is done at the junction of the neck to the head of the spine, and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" as we have the form before.
and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and illnesses of the chest are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever nor dryness, and is the illness ancient, if it be done. II cauteries on the  forcele in their veins; and the other cautery removes the pain between II nipples;
and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see it, make cautery by pricking the whole cautery which is called "point" because its form is as before in the illness of the ears;
And let the points be up to XXX, or wherever it reaches.
After treatment of the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be at III reins according to this form:
And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, because you make them three cuts deep.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, make the patient lie on his back and side; after lift the kernel which is inside the little one with the two fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, then remove the cautery which has two nerves in its place as shown here.
and cauterize the kernel until it pierces to the rib, and the figure of the cautery should come together with four cauteries;
and for this one is made cautery with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the figure of cauterization consists of six cauteries.
And the nerves are according to the fineness of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:
And sometimes is adjusted on this nerve for which there are VIII cautery.
After put on the cautery pricked with sail; After make rest the patient, and let not the limbs be moved by long time until it is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upward, which rarely happens, then apply a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle or many cauteries in pricking.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it is estranged from its complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and the ways of cures accustomed and he does not profit at all, therefore it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and his hands. Of this then after make him three cauteries one below the shoulder blade by the quantity of an ounce, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries outside the two ribs until the figure of the cauteries be at three angles, and have such space between one another that they not be joined together when they will rot;
And let the cauteries be so well done that they will reach the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and reigning upon the stomach here, in point according to the quantity that you see of incisions; then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point."
After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed.
When it comes to the liver pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forcibly removed from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it at all, if it is necessary that the patient be treated upon his bed; and sign of incisions III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, defier the hypochondria, there where the  ribs of man come;
and there must be space between each cautery the size of a finger. and let the cauteries be long along the body, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cautery;
and burn only the middle of the kerf, and let the patient lie straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, then lying down, extend his legs, and raise his arms;
And if you desire it, you may cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take care that you do not burn the whole kerf, for you would dry out the whole body; and that it does not come to boiling, because the kerf is very subtle there, and you know how to see.
When it has an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong;
And if it is in the membrane, he feels pain sharply.
And then when this treatment fails to heal, it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his head;
and then apply a poultice to the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to the sun, because of this it is shaped as follows: And cauterize with the cautery until the skin is burned and it reaches the white beneath, until the wound is completely closed.
Afterwards, treat according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
and it is not proper that of this cautery use none others than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been corrupted no time.
Therefore he may boldly work, and everywhere it seems to me better to leave it.
of the cautery of blisters
The ancients said that one must do to weeping cauteries of roots of aristolochia, and in such manner: Take a root of aristolochia long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and whether dry, and as thick and long as your fingers. and soak it in oil, and press it into the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the handle and the neck, and II small cauteries a notch going down in the part that is below the beard;
and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a notch; and I cautery removes the pain, and I other on the stomach, and I between II shoulders, and II as II ribs down from the cautery which is between II shoulders;
And do not press your hand tightly, but rather make it open as if smelling.
And they said that no old man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess. and jump out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of mice with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are III ways of cautery that are all good.
Of which some manner is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, in lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before;
and do not press your hand to all the cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back.
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the heart which is positioned in the mouse, or the cut of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After he puts the two nerves inflamed until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then removes the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, cauterize all the cautery to three nerves.
After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
Cauterization is not good for edema, except for the method called “asclytes.”
When you treat it according to the ways that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in place of the breast; and let the cautery be close to the space of the heart.
After leave the cautery open for a long time to get pus, and let not the wound of the patient after the cautery. and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the keyhole that we have before shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is previously put.
When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic, and are full of yellow-white fluid, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deep with it, thus close the opening around the white, and be the cautery according to this form.
After make on II legs II cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife. And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
And leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they remain open there;
After the curing of the other cures that we have said.
When a solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues retentive and digestive that is in the stomach and in the intestine are depleted, and cannot be cured by means of cures; And you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said here before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; And four cauteries around the head subtle to all the cautery clavicle subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the groin, and I cautery on each flank, and II small cauteries on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you do cauteries: Three on the spine of the back, this which is all outside under the alar bone point and point in triangular shape, and one cautery under the head two.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face one makes the great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; and let the cautery remain open long time After the cure the place until it is healed.
When you cut the skin, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all burning upon that skin cut; and let it remain as long as the cautery comes to the origin of the vein, so that the blood stops;
do this once or twice, and if there is much skin, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of openings beneficial until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on  the skin, it will have more help.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a disease that can be healed only by cautery.
When to any comes fistula, and is filled and cast putridity and corrupted moisture, so the should prove at once a fine tent, and guard that you know at once the tent how much it has of width.
After heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it into the fistula according to the quantity that the thing entered there, and restart the cautery until that flesh and corrupted are burned, once, or twice or three times, according to the quantity of  need.
And guard against damaging the nerves that are within, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, guard those parts, and make no incisions except in the fatty tissue, and think that it is not a perforation.
After curing the area until it is healed, and if the lesions are cleansed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the lesion is completely healed.
And if the materials are not removed, know that the lesion is corrupt, and the bone at its base is corrupted. And thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the reins, and from great flatulence, and does not take any form (or doesn't come in shape), then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will be more helpful.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make a cautery in the part outside above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic begin, and there on the right and on the left, and each cautery as long as my finger.
and I make the cautery outside on the back, where it is needed.
And let the cauteries be made according to the form previously mentioned.
When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends lag behind; and when they come, there is great pain. Therefore it behooves one to make three cauteries around the head, as we have said, or cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back;
And let the cauteries be clavicle-like, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
And it is found that the place of the viscous department is viscid, so it behooves you to cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is within the circle.
And let the cauteries be like those with which the stomach was cauterized.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make three cauteries of large olive wood, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others.
and cure until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it behooves you to purge the patient of the thick humors with fetid pills, or other pills that resemble good things. After this, make a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is done in many ways, some of which are as follows:
that you cauterize on the hip bone III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and large, and there be between each cautery of space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive;
Sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the top of the hip bone, for which there are IV according to this form:
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip.
but make in such manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the marrow be burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, then you make II cauteries where the patient says that pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle IV fingers, on the left side a little;
And let the cautery curette be, and let it burn the thickness of the heart.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the two feet or near it, cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery which is called “points.” And if it is necessary, if you do more.
And if it is that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make cauterization with the curette or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left them so that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a solution of belly from which he had death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the sage say in the cautery of the hip, for this is how it should be done, make a iron such as and as large as a thimble, or a little less, and either from the interspaces and either between interspaces up to the other with spacing the quantity of a knuckle;
and let the instruments be over to part, and let them also be like nuts, and there be the iron hand well made;
And this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and gives off heat, and then put it on the bone of the ill hip, and be turned over the sound side;
and cauterize once the cautery is red and let it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its harm, and it is seen little who uses it;
and nevertheless these are good cauteries, which the one who can suffer it and where it is needed.
The cauteries of medicine burning is that you make the instrument in between chatterers in which descends the edge of the door, and be of iron or of a length to one side, and in the height have two, and between each the quantity of the thickness of a coin. And be open downwards and upwards, and they join together according to this form:
After put on the bone of the hip on the patient lying on his side healthy, and after your hand very high on the bone of the hip. After throw between the two circles of the hot awl which is heated to the fire the spot, and let him one hour ten, and suffers the patient the heat and the burn of it.
For there it finds medication also as of fire;
And when the medication is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip of soft awl, and leave thus three days, and put on butter as long as that which is black of the burn is taken away. and leave it for three days so that it may rot;
and this would be the last aid after the cure of dressings as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, then do you make an instrument that is held as according to what you have done in the hip augmentation;
and this is the manner of the hot awl, and I have written it or treated of the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small opening that the point of a razor can enter into;
where there is a small opening that the point of a razor can enter into; and place one pot above the other well sealed, and put alkali and charcoal and sweet awl above, until there is the right amount of powders on top as you have well grasped it in your hand.
and let him so until it descends down its fever and excrement or as much as it can fall, then take all that  sickness and place it on hot embers and on alkali as before.
And then if will be much fever and is administered in the form of works of medicine and cauteries of other members.
Because it does the work like fire, and if to other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus as turpentine and honey of cashew nuts and hot embers with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Gaius tells us about a cure of which one man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatica vein, and he spoke well, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed as he teaches afterwards.
And say in this manner that you take the green fresh and dry litharge, and grind it very well with a little fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and bind it;
and let it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel anymore the burn.
And then make him enter into a bath until the body is a little bit aroused, and put him in his bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use cauteries of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fire of sheep, it helps a lot;
and it must be done the cautery in this manner. Take a linen cloth and wet it with old oil, and put it on the socket which is between the thumb and the foot, and the other called fossa.
After take sheep's wool, and grip it in fire until it is charcoal, and lay it on the vein, and let it for as long as it is steaming;
and repeat thus, and do not cease to do thus until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is ceased.
and this manner of cautery is called "cauterization of sheep".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too much evacuation, or by similar matter spread cold, none of these appearances is worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after that the patient is emptied of fetid pills or other similar things, that one make upon his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "point";
and if you see it, make three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have tight throats when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see these and you want to treat them, cauterize it with the cautery of this one according to this form. So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally.
And if you see it, so cauterize around the spine with a cautery that stings two or three lines, and let the points be near each other.
After curing the wound as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not administer cautery in a place that is in the space of nerves.
of the pain of the joints
When pains of joints are from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the people call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
make the most cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you take hold upon the face of the foot, then do cauterize to the whole cautery as one claims "point." And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, with all the olive cautery.
And if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand there beyond when the point of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines;
and if any pain remains in the hands, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the shoulders or as far as the armpits, cauterize each part and give good governance to the patient and proper medicines.
For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When a rupture comes in the groin and the bowels descend to the groins and it is new, then when you see to cure it, he must not urinate that day. and let him use things that loosen his belly so that the fire descends from his belly.
after the fire sits on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the boils are repaired, and move them to your sides, and place an incision beneath the rupture on the bone of the finger, and every sign that seems like half a circle above the body;
then examine the cautery of this form:
as long as it is white and it feels soft. Then move the boils to their place. and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backward;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a bandage on the thighs, and another on the leg that holds his hands;
then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat it again until you come to the bone. And guard carefully that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the patient does not die, or other evils.
And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of big people also great according to their measure;
after three days' care the place of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed;
after the care of other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie for forty days on his back until the wound is well joined;
and it is necessary that his nurses be diligent for a long time, so that the boil does not burst when he wants to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, if it is administered a good band, and wear it for forty others days;
and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard himself from too great repletion of drinking and eating, and from too high braiding;
And when he does this teaching so is he whole healed.
And I will say here after the cure of tailoring in its chapter.
When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then to them you make the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and either burns it a third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said.
and none of the ancients said that it must be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form;
but first sign the place of the joint and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand amidst all the cautery clavicle
But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is of no avail, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called «poins», and let the cauterization be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and of its pain.
if he is healed by the first cautery, it is well;
if those, commence the other cautery upon that one, because their custom is that it must be moved to the member which is near, for which it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is healed.
The wounds are aided at times by cautery with great help, and even the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see the cautery being used, take heed if the patient is at the beginning and if she has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither sends nor remains, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the sick person, then make V cauteries on their head. And one at the crown, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the heater.
and I keep your hand so that the cautery comes as close as to the bone, and until the bark comes out so that the vapors of the gross humors may escape.
and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if the swelling is everywhere spread; and if it manifests clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and I cautery on the top of the neck, and II cautery on the spine of the neck, and VI cauteres on the spine of the back, and I great on the crupie and I other below, and II on the II shoulders; and II on the cuts, and II on the tendons of the leg, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and guard the nerves that are on the last bone of the foot so that you do not burn them.
and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that when more cauteries are made, the more help is done, and the more it benefits.
And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as a healthy person does, because the body is already totally corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
After care the place with flour of eggs with honey and other cures until it is healed.
When a swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb.
and let the cautery be a little bit deep in the thickness of the flesh. Then the care of dressings until it is healed.
And at times one makes cautery by hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus is removed the inflammation.
And nonetheless no one should interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable of the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the illness called "albaras" is severe, and the engine of medicine is of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a point thoroughly, according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the blanchour is removed, and its color changes.
Then the cure of flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and blood from alondre, of each one part; and be well all together, and be bound with a cloth, and be aired to the place as long as it is sound.
The cure of the sore by cautery
When a sore comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with the cautery which seems like a circle, all around the border of the sore.
And nonetheless the wise say that one should also make cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
And nonetheless those do not seem to me good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time;
and more straightforward is that it be cauterized outside, with the cautery which is called 'circle', as we have said in much of cauteries.
When someone has a malady called 'adubelati', and it lingers in dying or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the water of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the heat; and you see it haste to die: therefore cauterize it around with many small cauteries, by pricking; afterwards let it be thus. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced through the whole cautery, so heat the cautery of this which is the form:
And place your hand in the middle of the sickness which is called “adubelati” until the cautery has pierced the heart, and be such the cautery that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rot be lessened.
After the cure until it is perfectly healed.
Another kind of illness there is called "corroding," and it is nothing else than a corruption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs like fire consumes dry vines.
If you see this illness in a place that can suffer cautery altogether with fire, then heat the cauteries, small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the illness is;
After the cautery of all parts as long as you eradicate all corruption, and there remains nothing of it, that all that is corrupt be removed.
And then leave it for III days, and put on the cauterized places softened crushed with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the cure of ingrowing flesh.
And if you see after 3 days that hairs do not grow back, it is good.
and if they do not, restart the cautery on those that remain corrupted.
And this manner has sometimes been cured with sharp medicines instead of fire cautery.
But nonetheless, the fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the cure of sharp medicine in the section. Take it when you need it.
of the splints which come to the feet Many times it happens that by fire a sickness is born which is called “closed” according to our understanding, and it is a great thing that hinders the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is according to two manners. This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is that you heat the iron rod as if it were a reed of lead, and it is made from good iron to the extent that it can point at every angle, and that there are subtle edges.
Afterwards, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail as long as it reaches the end of the nail. and let him leave it so for three days until it begins to fester. then make a poultice of wild mallow ground with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the place with ointment, hindering flesh until it is healthy.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and often happen in hands and feet, then you must bring them a cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: Take a piece of iron or steel, or the tip of a needle, and place it on the nail and the other things, that is to say warts. And place the piece on so that it wraps around the whole thing, then put a drop of hot oil on it, and hold your hand well and press down with turning so that the edge of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot oil going deep to the root.
And the patient endures a bit of the hot water sting for an hour. Then let him be, and it will loosen from all its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you have reached all those that are on the body, then cure the sores that generate flesh.
When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or another, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine. and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery.
If you let him tremble, and hasten his health from the cold disease.
At times, by fire, the body appears with baths, or puss-filled pustules that come from large, corrupted matters.
Then it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes cautery on the head of each pustule: A subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or from a long aristeologe root, or at the lentil cautery.
And sometimes the cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them forward, but are broken the superfluities from which they come, and are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things. and it is very grievous thing to prolong.
And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, immediately hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and strain it very much until the bleeding be appeased under your finger, and that no drop comes out anymore.
Then put the olive cautery irons, several small and large, to fire until they are all red.
Then grasp it, large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is visible, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there as long as the blood is restrained.
And if it jumps out when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, so take hastily another from the cautery which are on fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stopped.
And guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient;
And know that when blood runs from the artery, it cannot be well stopped even when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on top which have the power to stop blood. and it be bound and held firmly.
Who will bring it to rest by tightening with straps or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not profit him, not at all.
And if this happens to anyone and they have not yet used any present medicine, then he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is secured over the wound and over the vein. and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water frequently until the blood is congealed and thickened and secured.
and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about every illness where it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicines, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries.
and I have set this chapter of them up to the foot, and in this chapter I will go by the same way for those who are found more easily those who desire it.
And thus as I begin these things, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things. where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to cures. There come those who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily due to the ignorance they find in their disease, and the greatness of their wickedness. and from these one should have fear.
And among these there are some who give you their meaning, and say: Wait, I am healed"; and the illness is deceitful.
It is not right that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not open yourself fully but wisely to those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have trust and profit from.
And use divination and indication in the treatments of your patients so that health may be converted.
And this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Three dear friends, our Lords give you good understanding and straightness, and if you will desire to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter by chapters, according to what it is before, the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find them more easily those which you will need.
Know that this sickness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the head of the child.
And sometimes it comes from a reason that is unknown.
And I have never seen this sickness outside of children, and in all those that I have seen it hastened death. And for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work of these treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water and it grew each day until he could not bear it.
and believed so much the moisture that he was dead, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone.
and this work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you make in the middle a wide split.
and let it also be as long as two of us, as long as the moisture flows.
and see here the form of the spatula.
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the corners of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it doesn't return to you: then it is necessary that you make in the middle three splits according to this manner.
And after the incision extract the moisture completely. After strain the fissures of cloths and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave so until the fifth day;
then unbind it, and treat the wound with coverings and ointments, and leave the main dressing to be strained, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is fortified and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look where opens the size of the abscess, and its assembly of liquid;
for never once is it in front; never once behind; never once on the right; and never once on the left.
Therefore, cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of liquid, and make it according to what you have power to do.
and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flowing, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone a disease which is called «catarrh» in the eyes or in the chest, and the illness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help at all, then the last cure is cauterization with this one which covers the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see it necessary to cut them, that the patient makes his head go back; after rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then stretch the patient's neck to the whole cloth; then look where the vein beats, and its location on one and the other is after the ears, and so are put back;
then mark the locations with a pencil, then cut both of them with a sharp spatula from the side, until the tail vein comes to the bone, and this is through the width of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as I do across.
And when the vein is cut, blood leaps out from above continuously.
And if the artery does not appear at the touch, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark with a pencil and make until the bone;
And as for the blood to be let out, it is six inches, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone without suppuration, then cover the wound with a poultice so that no abscess comes, then restrain the wound and bind it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine When migraine old comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moistors of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit him, if we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient lays back the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little deeper than in some men who are too cold;
and if it is deeper, then strain the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly. Then take the spatula of which this is the form: Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it on top with pincers, and well depart from the webs that are under each part;
And if the artery is subtle, turn it with the point of the uncine, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all of itself at all.
And treat with blood of the VI c, up to III;
And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in II lengths of a strong double thread of silk so that corruption does not come before the healing of the wound, and blood flow occurs.
Then cut the superfluity which is between the II liens in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, so do cauterize with the cuticular cautery up to the bone as long as the shoulders are cut;
and this is the best work if the patient doesn't have a fever and is of hot constitution. For the cautery helps to finish the moisture: for that reason it is of more great help against moistures.
Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put a tight bandage over it well made;
and when they are untied, so be cured with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with bandages until it is healed;
and if you lack the artery cord as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover with cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and the strain to your hand that the blood be stained. and if you lack those presently, then put upon the place your finger until the blood be coagulated, and raise the place of cold water as long as the blood ceases, and be strained as it is proper;
And must have between the two knives one finger of thick spacing, and then when you have singed the two places, and you put the red hot iron upon it as long as it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be spaced apart between the two shoulders because it is not entirely welded by this cautery at all.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
and that which is quicker and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting from two parts, but the cuts be well thickened to keep longer their heat. For when the instruments is too hard, it holds less its heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the side of the head above, and no cure from medicine helps, and you see the face of the patient being rolled up, and feels or forehead walking as if from tremors; and where they are wet and moist so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are inflamed, and scorched by the heat of the tears, so there is a need for this cure. And the ancients called it "contused cure," and that you do in reverse to the patient who has this illness.  The hairs that he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "contused cure," and that you do in reverse to the patient who has this illness.  The hairs that he has on his forehead, then make III cuts on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; And let one of the incisions be also as II should all remove the forehead in swallowing down until the eyebrow, and the others II as II ribs above the papers, and you guard the incision of the arteries that are as II ribs above the papers;
And keep your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of III should across the joined;
And have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe the blood, then put the spatula sharp from II parts of which is the shape:
From the incision that is over the temple until the second incision; And scrape all the marrow that is between the two incisions to all the tissue that is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract this spatula. If you put in the first incision the instrument which is called “cultellaire”, and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
And place the rib cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and the rib edge towards the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle fissure.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head toward the eyes as long as the incision is continuous to where it opens to the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle fissure to the other end.
And then extract the blood evenly, and express its quantity for the taken blood.
Then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and honey, and guard that an abscess does not come there.
And on the third day untie the ligature, and then administer a strong potion of boiled water, then the cure of oil of basil with rose oil, and other cures that one uses for wounds, until it is healed.
When to any vein comes acute catarrh by custom, and you see the eyes dimmed and small, and weakening the sight, and the whites burned; and the hairs fall out, and where it pierces causes sharp pain, and the patient sneezes. Therefore, you know from these accidents that these materials and this cautery come only from many veins, and the cured wound that is there, such is this one.
And it is that you command the patient to retract his forehead, then make a wide cut between the eyebrows, and another one at the width of I eye. And beginning from the split of the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the eating.
and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then carefully between the two lips of the split put old cotton, and bandages of linen; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and keep yourself from a hot abscess;
when it is removed, it is proper that you rub the bone until skin begins to grow, then treat it with drying things that cause skin to grow back.
In such manner: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice. And administer it on these wounds to prevent the flesh from rotting.
of the stopping of ears
Everything that falls into ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or piece of stone or similar thing like iron; Or seeds such as peas, beans, lentils; Or flowing things like water and honey and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or another thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; And make them sneeze with a condiment, and plug their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and is the ear upwards.
Much of the time comes force by this cure;
and if it does not come force, then he administer extraction as pinches subtle, from which is the form:
If it jumps force with the pinches, it is good;
if not those, then administer extraction to the  bone subtle of small fold;
and if it does not jump by those, then make a caine of iron and put the head of the caine or hole in the ear strongly, and stop those who are around the caine with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the caine; then the treatment must be strong because many times it comes as we have said.
and if it does not come strong in this manner, then take glue of that which takes the birds, and put it into some instrument which is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and treat strongly.
And if she does not follow all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear in such a way that an abscess boils there, and spasms;
And the manner of opening it is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening at the root of the ear in the fat where they depend; And let the opening be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the stone, then break it according to your strength, and suck it diligently with your mouth;
And care for it until it is healed.
And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an extraction;
And if it cannot issue, then administer a spatula thin according to this form: and make an incision in that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is wet due to moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it.
Then extract it with subtle pincers and a suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the water therefore that falls into the ear, it is appropriate for the patient to use a first external dressing, and widen the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it has leaped forth by means of this, it is good.
If this is not the case, then take many grains according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and cauterize them a little with fire; and put them in the patient's ear where it is perforated, and let it come out on its side, and fire another grain on top of the grain which is in the ear; and do not cease to do this with grains upon grains until the water comes out entirely, and thus it will all come out entirely;
And if you see, then take some reed and put one end in the ear, and hold the other end in fire until the reed burns down to a point;
then do again another part of other joints until the water is all out, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is large-bodied and one can feel it, then administer extraction of pincers. and this is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the treatment is not helpful, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if there appear no worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the instrument of which this is the form:
And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed gently throughout the chain. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then stop plugging the chain with cotton as I said in the stone;
and if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations;
and if you distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see; And let it be of silver or of arain [perhaps 'iron'] three parts under the small hole, and above over to distill;
and to press within the distillation the instrument of iron well made for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; then throw in your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the channel, and the channel be in the ear;
then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil be distilled or the end of the ear; and he feels it within the patient, and let the distillations I a little be heated by fire then one puts them in the ear. and keep that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping of ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men because of a wound or  flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes come from within the ear, if one cannot see it.
and sometimes one can see the hole clearly,
Those that come from within and cannot be seen, are of great healing in more situations, and for this reason you should put the ear of the patient to the sun. and look inside: If you see the hair growing back, if the work has all this spatula of this form:
And be both sharp and deep in front and behind, so that it does not cut the ear;
If the hair growth is from flesh or cartilage of the ear, if then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh be all removed.
And if the ulceration is in the ear, take a fine light razor and warm it a little at the fire, then put it in the flesh of the ear.
If you feel the hair growth where the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not strike the nerves of the ear;
Then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment. Do this for no day until the wound be healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder upon pounded vitriol;
And if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you draw out the tent and move another moist tent in cerote which should be made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which are or treatments of distillations.
This athlet that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, then it is necessary that you extend them with forceps and pincers, and the cope of a spatula from its roots. then put on their place powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorticate, then cauterize with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision should move.
and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of the groin Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem brittle in its shape and in its hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "Hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large in the paper above and below; The works are such:
The works are such: Take heed if the hail moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know.
Do then the wide, then the eschar of each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
If you cannot cover it without feeling a little the paper, so it does not harm the patient.
And if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointment restores it soon and prevents flesh.
And if the stone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and hold the stone with pliers, and press it from both sides.
And if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it does not matter.
And when the stone is cut, leave the eye of salt water, and cure the place of those who cause flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is generated in the tissues of the paper above, and this happens more to children than anyone else, and it hurts their eyes, and they get cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears rush into their eyes;
And because of this, they lie on their faces down, and sleep on it, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the swelling and appearance have covered with exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the excoriation between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your healthy;
and then takes the linen sheet, and prepares a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains each side, then puts it on him; and presses with his two hands from one side and another, so that the sides are assembled within the circle;
then makes in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a slit of wide size, and not be more than the wound one makes on the vein;
and make the skin in part as far as you come to the sides; And in more places comes the opening from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract then with a whole piece of cloth between your two hands at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left as long as it is spread;
and guard that you do not add to the split, that you do not come to all the spatula until the eye, that you do not blind it.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, so carefully widen the split slightly until it opens.
then extract it as we have said, then moisten drapes in hot and cold water, and put it on its place, and restrain with bandages.
And if to such men who grind grain and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which is lodged.
Then treat until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to the place hot, so its cure with plasters soothing until it is healed.
of the hairs of the papers When hairs are attached to the eyes other than natural ones and are enflamed, they harm the eyes and bring about various illnesses such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids and clouding, as much as it is a cause for the destruction of the eyes;
and its treatment follows FOUR ways: either by cauterization with fire together, or by sharp medicine according to that which is before or the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by forceps, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
If it is converted, it is good; if not, then put a needle through all the thread above; and be it next to the edge of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and pull the thread upwards all over the paper, and turn it back to the razor;
Then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, all over the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small one;
Then pull the thread out, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then place on top of the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided into all.
And if it needs, one cuts a large quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened;
Then make on all the spatula above the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the large tear until small. And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle in one of the two corners of the heart, and then scrape it completely.
Then assemble the two lips with a suture of a needle with all the finest wool thread, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of the hairs on the two eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you see to do this.
And if this is not, if you have no care for it, then leave the suture and the hairs until three or four days.
Then cure the wound without suture with drying and constricting things, because the paper revives at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the suture is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear. and if in another way
and if in another way and that you mark the paper with a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at III ounces wide according to the form which is here.
Then cover what goes over the small forces equally according to the form which is here.
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle which has thread, and put it into the middle of the figure; and put the other thread near the larger tear, and the second thread near the smaller one, and assemble between your two threads evenly.
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have marked it, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointment.
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted:
If it is necessary that you use those things that we have said about incision;
But the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of bites is according to this form: And it is that you would convert the paper and the send inside according to those that I have said, and then make II bites by art, and II subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; And cut as II heads from II parts where you hold the threads;
Then assemble one and the other subtly above those that rise from the paper of the eye, and restrain the II bites from the II parts forming; And let it so for some days, and the skin which is restrained will die and shrink and pull, as long as it dries by itself.
If he delays, if he strikes with force, then treat him until he is healed;
and when the wound is healed, and if the paper has been lifted, and they can no longer prick the hairs;
And this is the form of the two legs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
The works are such that you prick a fine needle, and it puts in the silk thread soft and fine; then assemble the shoulders and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long;
then order in the chase the other silk thread finely, and knot the ends of the thread;
then put the patient's head on your palm;
and be in the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle to all the chase in the root of the hair joined, and make it pierce into the paper gently until you draw it above the natural hair;
Then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more.
Then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out of all the chase onto the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you shall thrust the chase downward to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out through the opening above and you see it by the sight of your eye.
Then you shall draw the chase and the thread, and close your eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows above it.
And if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural chevelure, and either raise it with that or leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
of the corruption of the eye When this illness which is called "aleocrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways.
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by suddenness of wound, or incision or cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of treating it is that you cut that suture and separate the lips of it, and put inside linen tents, and tie it until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict. Because if you do those things, the illness returns worse than the first;
but work with softening things, such as fennel; and the rose of water or aloe and flaxseed cooked, and melted dragon oil in any oil, and wrap a tent, and treat it with those.
And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not weld itself according to the form that it was before;
And these works that we have said are nothing but treatments for this illness so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
This illness which is dislocation is truly called “axacrati,” and is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things;
And the way of the work in this is that you prick a needle, so that it has a double thread, and you put it into the flesh, and let it pass from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread comes out at both shoulders of the flesh;
Then lift the flesh above the entire needle, and cut it with the spatula wide. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is right, it is good;
If it is not so, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make II slits where it costs inside the paper.
And let the heads of the II slits be at the II angles of the incision that you have cut, and make them so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no "I greiche";
Then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its costs is pulled down, from those which follow the paper, then adjust the II parts severed, and stitch them with a thread of linen;
Then cure it with those that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the malady comes from a split or a suture or a cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat slit under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above; then carefully between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
then carefully between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; And one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form;
And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in many positions.
When this suture happens to men's hands in such a manner that the skin above is joined with the white of the eye, and cannot move or make its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the skin, and lift it upwards;
And the extent of the pincers, until you cut what is stuck to the spatula, subtle, which is not too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula too blunt nor pierce the eye;
And let your incision, which you skin that assembly, lightly so that the paper returns according to its natural form;
And is healed all that assembly, and do no times in the eye salt water, and the lift of sweet water, and of collar;
Then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened in abundance of an egg; And after the third day use of the collar and things soaked as long as it is healed.
Know that the nail is according to II manners: It is nervous and resembling the hard syfac, and another which is not at all nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and one cauterizes it pinches, so cannot one;
and both of them begin toward the great tear, and cross little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then where the angle has pinches of little wrinkles, and it is above. then take a needle, and put in its hair of horse or cow hide, or ox, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and put it into the angle, and pierce through with the whole needle, and tie the angle with thread and it is above, and scrape along all the hair the side of the angle which follows the small wrinkle and the silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear throughout the spatula subtle and with small forces, and leave the natural char tear so that by incision does not come the body of tears accustomed.
And sometimes the fingernail comes to the nailbed alone, as we have said. Then the scraping has all the spatula shaped from this is the form:
And keep that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the nail be not pierced;
and after the incision put in the eye a bit of silk ground, and from the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day. then cure of those that it behoves as long as it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle, and the nailbeds cannot enter, many times is cured this appearance of a nail of medicines.
and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form. And move the hinge upward subtly, and if you see that it decreases not and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the eye colocynth made of litargire and the red colocynth and seal, and plug the eye until the other day.
If no other thing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil, then treat it with milk and first cure the boil as well as possible until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh near the eye is harmed by the moisture, then suspend it with the bandage and cut off a part and not half completely, that no tear liquid may come.
Then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
The eyes of some men are born at times red and cover the white part and hold onto the eyelids, and turn to the outside, and appear like a rose of a balustrade.
And the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then open their eyes, and with all that flesh with bandages suitable to them, and sustain it with force.
Then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the end, and take care that you do not wound the eye in the work.
And let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces by which one removes the bone, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil of silphium ground or distill red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the oil a cloth soaked with beaten egg white, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess.
And if it remains nothing, and the wound still burns, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess.
Then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until the flesh is joined in the oil by this manner.
But nonetheless, it is necessary that you follow the treatment of each weak oil according to natural means. and of the way accident, in work of iron;
And do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member suffers from that work.
Those veins are red that are covered above the eye, and they take away from sight their work and weaken the eye all days.
It is therefore necessary first that you look at the eye, to see where it is, and if there is nothing else but the pain. Therefore do it in this manner:
Instruct the patient to put his head on your chest, then suspend those veins along the entire spine according to your wisdom, and let the  veins be thin, doubled according to this form:
And let two bones be joined by degrees in the body according to this form.
Then one should tie those veins tightly and carefully wipe the blood hour after hour, until you see the removal of those veins outside the eye;
And guard that you do not blind the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins.
and when you have done this, if distill into the eye collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining of the seed.
and if you do not have power to gather all of it in this hour, then make a poultice on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and are assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The mire so named "arissati" fistula:
when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a thing in it which you cut on the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the tools of what here are the forms.
And it is called "rough chief," and it is made of fire iron to the head front, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then restore the place with medicinal excretives.
if the flesh is soldered, and there is no birth of cartilage, and the body of the bow is soldered, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew itself and is not at all an abscess, and a bad accident does not come to it, know that it is healed;
If this does not work, if there is no other means than to bring the fistula to the opening of the wound according to this form: and that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take the wood according to this form, and let the head of iron be at III angles, and the staff be thinned to the top as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye slightly, then turn the entire wood until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his wound;
and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens in its places, then let the matter go into the wound; It is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open throughout and all, and they do not come to distort to the nose, nor lessen, then it befits you to bind the patient.
Then the clean, then put suction cups or a vessel without injuring to suck, then put over the eye a poultice made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then restrain the eye, and plasters it with bandages and cloths;
And the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each in IV, and then put one over the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
Then restrain from above with a hard bandage-like thing, and recommence the suction cups to suck without injuring;
Then remove the leeches and let the eye be restrained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, then it is necessary that you restrain it much;
Then remove the ligament after the day and night, and if you see the eye repair, it is good;
If not; then begin again the plaster and bandages and the ligament and leeches until it is healed.
of the dislocation of a web When rupture comes in the membrane of the eye, then open it, and come forth papers like as the grain of resin, and is expectable to see.
then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle in the root of the lower part until the upper one, then thrust another needle where it has the double thread from the inner part. and let it be examined, and leave the first needle according to the disposition
then cut its length with the double thread and tie one part of the skin around it, and bind it well, then remove the needle and put on the other eye half in a fold of egg.
and leave it until the thread falls with the skin, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
and at any time the wound is restrained by skin on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eyelids, and enter them immediately.
then remove it until it is healed.
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bow which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water.
And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on an equipped and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it as much as you see the bow come up to your eyes; Then so it is fixed, and do not let it descend and be dislodged the light, and the patient sees things as he used to;
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not arranged as we have said.
If you do sit the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make on the cornea a hole through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as much as the bow allows.
And when it is out, distill in the hot water mixed with honey, or water or fennel boiled and honey, then be cured of another cure until it is healed.
of the eyes We have taken the appearances of waters in their division, and those that are necessary for inspection; so in work according to health.
It is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye and hold it very tight;
then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if their eyes are left, or on your right hand if their eyes are right;
then take in your right hand, if their eye is left, the instrument that is called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if their eye is right;
then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a finger in that whiteness of the eye to the part of the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument which is called «almagda» virtuously, and restrain your hand until it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is necessary that the measure of the channel almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the nipple to the end of the blackness; and that is the crown of the eye;
so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument up to where the water is, then squeeze it below one way after another.
If the water now descends, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest the little bit, and if the water comes back up the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is set in and it does not come up, then withdraw almagda lightly by turning your hand here and there;
and then put back in place a point of seed silk, and leave of those the eye inside. Then put by means of a poultice or soaked cloth with rose oil and yolk of egg, and bind with the healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our time, put on top a certain crushed thing with an abundance of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter into the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit", of this is the form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep into it, but make its location subtle, then put almond as we have said.
and at the completion of the work equip the patient with the bed next, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day.
Then the one who is tied up in that same dark house, and he proves his sight, and I make him see some things, and then I put the bandage back on until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bandage them because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess comes, that you unbandage the eye before the seventh day, and the address of this who soothes the abscess;
And when it is appeased, then unbandage the eye and put on his face the orilliet to cover for any day, and be again in that dark house.
And then he comes out of the house a little at a time, and converts himself into his ways;
and knows that no disciples should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda by perceiving [something], to which water is added, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it's a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see it;
and they are of a certain kind properly: And let the heads of these same subtlety, and the last one in three angled sharpness.
No times are born or made chariots adjusted diversely, for which there are some that seem scorpions with many feet;
and if there are any of such where it has a chariot incrusted of dusky color, and if to the chariot under of good color. In that one therefore of these chariots which is under-colored, and not incrusted, it is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In that one therefore of these chariots which is under-colored, and not incrusted, it is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; And works his nostrils, and casts the tool to those cars, and the hairs out. Then hold what you can sustain on the subtle sharp spatula of one side, until you know that all the flesh is removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be held, then open it with all the subtle light instruments so that nothing remains. and if without a swelling or abscess,  you saw, so as is convenient;
And if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the hairs are removed, then cast upon it either oil or wine. If the skin works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut:
therefore it is necessary that you put in it the thread of linen a bit thick, and be soaked with warm hands, and have between each one a space of 1/2 inch or less. and put the patient's shoulder with the thread in his nape to his power, and pull in gently until it comes through the nap into the mouth;
and many times children do this at school, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it.
Then hold the head coming from the nap in one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth in the other hand, and feel one after the other with care of those who are or thread.
Do this as much as you know that the new ones have corrupted that flesh, then treat the child, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it straight back to the wound as before.
Do this three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh.
and then put on the wound a cake of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, to which one distills oils and medicines onto the wound:
And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a basin, and conduct it so.
And if you see it, so make a closed cage, and let the instruments be full to purge the head.
And have your hand on the head to hold it when you heat the oil or any liquid.
from the flesh around the joint
Many times a disease called "tellus" is born in the head of the newborn, and it grows and becomes very large, so much so that it is a terrible thing to look at.
And for this reason, it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and remove all of its bone, then put on top of it the cautery or burning medicine.
And if you delay in cutting it until it is large, then beware that it is hard, of poor color, and of poor sensation.
If you do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts it at any time, there comes great harm to the patient.
And if the abscess is of soft touch, not of a dark color, and you see that one can completely cut it open, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the place with dry and astringent things.
Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, because in some men.
It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to look if the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and powdered incense; And put on the powders a piece of strong plaster or other adhering plaster, and let it stay until it falls by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of stitching is that you assemble the opening: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In some men, there are hard abscesses within the lips, like poppy seeds, some smaller and some larger;
therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and split them on each side, and take with forceps and cut it in each part;
then apply to the place after the incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood is stopped.
and then leave it thus, and treat the place with dry things until it is healed.
Many times on the gums there appears flesh joined, which the ancients call "albulus";
so it behooves you to support it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and leave the wound open to bleed.
then put on the place powdered vitriol or other astringent and drying powders;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. if it does not return after cauterization;
Sometimes they are assembled at the root of teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and rough; And sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth are foul-smelling.
So it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and hold his teeth or those scabs appearing until nothing remains there. And thus do of the blackness and of the greenness, and of the yellowness and of the other spots, as long as they are seen.
And if one removes those that are in the first place, it is good; If not those, then it begins again the second day and the third, until you have pulled out all.
And know that the teeth need diverse forms of instruments to be pulled out, according to what the work shows, because those razors with which one pulls out outer teeth have other forms than those with which one pulls out inner teeth. and these forms and others be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take out as much pus as you can, because one must not do otherwise. because it is a very high substance up to the point that we have no excuse to erase.
Therefore when the patient is constrained to take milk, it is necessary for you to be certain about the tooth aching. Many times despite the pain the patient, and thinks that it is a tooth saint, and makes pus drain from the good tooth; and nonetheless does not depart at all the pain because of this, as long as the bad is remaining, because we have it already seen to do this to their healthy ones;
and when you are well certain of the tooth wanting to be removed, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides; with a strong spatula to ward the gums from all parts
then move it with your two hands or forceps subtly at first peck and peck, until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps. and let the patient's shoulder be in your holy space between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and put it gently inside each side, and move it as you did at first.
And if the tooth is pierced and broken, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, where the holes are. and if you tightly hold it with tongs, that it does not break while being held.
and it is necessary very skillfully to work around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And thus be well warned that you do not break it, and leave a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first.
And guard that you do not act as the ignorant masters do, who by their haste and boldness break the chariot sometimes and bring nothing of what we have recounted.
but bring sometimes by the opening of those great illnesses for the roots that remain there, or for the chariot they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is drawn, wash its place with wine or oil and salt.
and if bleeding comes, which often happens, apply to the place vitriol ground up.
and if those do not help, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, to which we put teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, that they do not double when you pull the tooth.
and these are the forms: And let the members be thick so they do not bend when working, and let them be of good iron, well made, and toothed to hold tight.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the breast, it is necessary that you put on top a moistened cotton in butter for a day or two, until the wound is healed, then put in pliers called "algefri," so that the shoulder seems like a bird's beak.
and be made inside as well as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say a spatula, because this is its form:
And let it be thick and big so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through this, it is good.
if this one, then help yourself with all your instruments, of which the forms come after this:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has II reins, of this is the form: and other instruments which are in front in the order of the teeth, and this instrument that seems like great pliers, whose form is here:
And let this instrument be thick so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted.
And the most skillful surgeons find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks a bone or other bones, or it can be broken, then he seeks the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, from this is the form:
And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it;
And then return to their place with medicines suitable to those, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, so the key has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it or trim it:
therefore the furrow; and if it is armed with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, and it resembles a small beak, and be of sharp iron on top;
And the copy prick and prick in hand days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then file with a such as this is form:
and also like the file with which one makes needles;
and in filing the tooth back and forth in your hands lightly, so that it does not move until it comes to a point;
then make it plain at the end with no scraping, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth before loosens, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he moves it without pain, and you have treated them with restraining medications, and they are useless;
If it is necessary to restrain with a gold thread, for the silver threads become green and corrode, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth being close together, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the chies between the remaining teeth, if there are one or more, until you come sagely to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then begin the covering again until the part where you began, and pull your hand subtly and sagely, so that it does not move.
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the chies of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue.
And then let it remain thus tight as long as it can, and if it loosens, or the threads slip, restrain it with another thread.
If it remains and serves thus its entire term, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two diseased ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls, it is put back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said.
And let no one interfere who is not knowledgeable and skilled, and sometimes the form of a tooth made from the bone of a cow's hoof is made, and it is put in the place where the defect is, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes this ligament which comes under the tongue or naturally, that is born thus; or by an accident of a joined wound;
and the works are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue;
then cut the  nerve of the tongue as long as the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is from a wound, then put the probe in and cut the nerve on that side;
and keep that the cut be not too deep for the artery which is below;
and when you have done it, then lift the level of  water and rinse, or with cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen;
and every night apply a salve to the patient, so that they may not harden.
And if bleeding occurs, put crushed vitriol on the spot. And if the blood does not stop, cauterize it with the lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this. then treat it with other remedies until it is healed
And if you see it of fiery color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, because it is a chancre.
And if it is declining towards whiteness and there is moisture, place the ointment and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on both sides. And if the blood does not stop in your work, put crushed vitriol on it until it is cleansed, then return to your work as long as you extract all pus.
Then lift its place from above and below, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Of abscesses of the throat Sometimes comes from within the throat boils that are called “godath,” and one calls them properly the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care:
If they are hard abscesses of small size and dusky colored, do not touch them with iron at all.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, nor for the drawing of blood; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will divide it where it would break by itself;
And if it is of white color round, and the root is subtle, then have an instrument prepared to cut, but first look whether the abscess chills rests and is appeased.
Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his shoulders be on your healthy one, and he opens the mouth and the surgeon places the instruments between his hands, and presses the tongue down to all the instrument, from which this is the form;
and it be of silver or fine steel as well as a knife:
And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if then take the probe and put it into the center, and thrust it upwards as much as you can;
and thrust no thing from the fabrics with it, then cover the instrument, from which this is the form, that seems like forces; and nevertheless the head are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs for this is the form: And be sharpened on one side, and on the other side not;
and when you have cauterized one of the almonds, cauterize the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and with hot and sweet water, and if there is a flowing of blood, gargle the patient with hot water, or apple peels cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding is stopped; then heal it until it is sound;
And at no time do other abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, so cauterize them thus like the two almonds;
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was in her throat, namely the small abscess;
and I had closed the entire throat well, so that the woman could not expire through the passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained so for a day or two.
And the abscess was so high raised that it had been driven into two furrows by its two openings.
I therefore took so much, and placed it in one of the incisions, then the thread was pulled out, and a great portion of the gut was drawn.
Then I made another piece in the other opening of the two, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue.
After I placed the incision in these abscesses, and packed a portion, and only a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat was cleansed and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at the abscess for a long time.
And the abscess grew back, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Then I engaged it and cauterized it inside the throat: So it remains without growing;
And I depart from these parts, and may God do what He will after me.
of the grape
When the skin is brought together around the grape, and it is plump and long, then it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is somewhat large and round, then it is called "grape".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess has subsided, and it is thin, then it behooves you to cut it;
and the one which is round and gathered together, and is not long. And if it is bloody or of a rusty color or black, then it behooves you to close the incision of it. For there is great peril upon the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention before; Then put the awl in the eye, and work it out, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
And you should not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit.
For if you cut more, it grieves the voice and speech.
And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of being cut, you should use an instrument to cauterize the senses that cause fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. And it is that the patient puts his head on your thigh, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in this chapter of cautery, and applies with very hot water so that it is not too thick nor too light. And use the tip of this instrument, for that is the form:
And have one hair or place the medicine, like the head of a spoon, and put the instrument over all the medicine on the wound;
and the patient be lying on his side so that the saliva and muscle tissue from his mouth flows away from the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the neck;
then hold your hand over all the medicine and press onto the wound, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it reddened and the irritations of the medicine be appeased;
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the channel above, as long as the cotton adheres to the wound;
and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait after IV or V days;
And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine.
And be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision;
if it is treated with fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and let it boil.
and the pot should be well covered with strong earth, and inside the pot have a breathing instrument according to this manner. And it should be of silver or iron, and one of the ends should be put in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye by the nose, as long as the eye is numbed.
After the wound heals often, as long as the skin is dry, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen. And do not do this before except at the decline of the hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a dog and put inside its head a wick of wool, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot. For the wool does not let the steam heavily bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times there are lodged in the throat bones or spines of fish, or any thing
So therefore it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing.
And that which does not open for you and is placed in the throat, it behoves you to make the patient vomit so that the food may be cooked in the stomach. But by chance if it gets stuck there through vomiting.
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cloth, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread. and to the sponge the thread, and then he swallows it. and when she comes to her place, if she dries up, then you will pull forward.
And if she does not come forward from those that we have said, then take the instrument of bronze according to this form.
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head raised up. and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to life, nor thrust the bone inside.
and move so that the patient puts the instrument in, for this reason that he may be moved or the thing is worse. If she pushes down, or he pulls it forward evenly all of the instrument, as long as she is forward.
of the cutting of the throat
At no time is medicine given to the wound, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; And when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
And if you see the wound, treat it with all little forceps, or subtle pincers that are suitable for this.
And if that does not work, take a dog's hair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put fire at the end of the dog's hair, and do this often. And if the patient stands of water all day.
Then take full of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it enter without swallowing, and move it with your hand often. And as soon as the patient feels the water, he will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, to the instrument that I said in the smoking of the grape.
Do this many times, for it will fall without struggling.
And the manner of the smoking is that you ignite the pot in which there are burning coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that one insert the head of the instrument.
then you place your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes until the throat
and the throat will now open, and if it does not open, start the fumigation again many times;
and let the patient suffer thirst, and chew salty things and others, and do not drink water;
and then it will be necessary that it is healed by this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the throat is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers so that they can enter into the throat; and it has a resemblance to the beak of an eagle, and it has sharpness from lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go;
Many resemblances of an abscess are, according to those who remember after here in this book, and differ in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways one of which is in its resemblance itself, and because of what it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the limbs where they are in the body.
For the abscess of the head is different from that of the foundation, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in the joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if on abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the boil is ripe according to its fulfillment;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are rotten, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like abscesses which are near joints.
For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets it be as long as it is rotten, by chance the ligaments and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is a cause of contraction in that limb.
Where the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb;
or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then as long as it is ripe;
and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion, except that one which is below the base, so that it may not break further, and be lengthened inwards, and a fistula comes. and not be able to heal in a great period.
And it is fitting that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is death according to its completion, and this is when the pain has been appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and of the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
and it is fitting that you make the perforation where more dependent the part of the abscess, and where it appears pus.
and be the perforation long of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equals where it has no foldings. In those that are dislocated, according to the member.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the puncture open as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce him before these parts, then it will lengthen the body of the venom from him, and it is full of much filth. and perhaps harden the lips and deepen them from him.
And if to any abscess which are perceived according to the breadth of the body, according to what the members have need.
And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to burn the core, and cover. When it has become as a shroud, and is dying, then one should do as with boils:
and if there are such that are split in three angles, and if there are such which one covers as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the armpits;
and if there are such where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Those who have no head, as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them fully;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, that you do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; then stop up the abscess until the other day, then do not pull anything away from it. do this many times in a row, as much as the bowel is whole.
samely if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man who is decrepit. For the spirit sometimes bursts forth with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you are not worried about it.
Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat cut, then administer bandages of linen or old cotton. and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that they come against each other.
And if you have cut into an abscess a part of the skin and have covered it back over, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
Then treat the wound, and its care with ointment as long as it is healing.
And if the flow of blood happens in your work, so administer cold water and ease it, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times.
And if the flow of blood persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is during wintertime, and the place where the abscess or boil is is very sensitive, then it is necessary to put on tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil.
And if it is in summertime, and the place where the abscess or boil is is fleshy, then it is necessary to put on cloths moistened in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then unbind the abscess and wipe it and treat it as needed until it is healed.
And this it behooves to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
as I have said how one must proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here see the chapter.
Where boils on the head come small abscesses, and they are manners of ours that are in cloths, as the joiner of a hinge, and there are many similarities.
There are some that are fatty and such ones which have moisture like poultices;
and if there are those that are hard and stony in shape, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary
And the works of the hip are such that you should consider all instruments which are called "entromissoire," because their form comes here afterwards, what they contain.
For if it contains moisture, so lift it from above with a long stick.
And when the moisture has been evacuated, then it is necessary to scrape off without leaving the hair which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves it.
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present if this one not, in water and in salt, and then apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day. And these correct those that remain of the night.
And then resume the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night.
Then cure the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds in the fat, so cut according to this form, of the long. And it throws its dressings, and the skin off from all sides, and puts all its care to drain under the coat where it lies;
And if the artery does you the opposite, so do those that I told you after.
And also do so for the abscess if it is purulent, and with cutting and caring as I have told you.
And the cutting above the purulent abscess and the moist one is lighter because they are of little blood. And if to any of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these were the abscesses that I cut or chiefs of an old woman;
and I found the abscess also like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be broken. And if one had made no incision, it would have been as well done as with a stone.
In other abscesses coming or at the head, those which come at the head of children and at the roots of the ears, let the opening be always at the lowest point, so that pus flows out easily.
and the cure as it is necessary.
Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come in other parts or of the body, and are bad, and are joined together with each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, like the boil and the abscess of the head, as we have said. and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many.
and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.
In that one therefore which you see of good disposition to the touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves from every side and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the vessel, and is not deep.
If it is necessary that you cut it from above, and the peel of each part, and make the two lips of the heart like incisions, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
and the train poke and poke, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and be neither the spatula thick nor trenchant, that the hand does not escape, and do not see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and extract the wound. and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal.
And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, as long as you complete it.
Then if there remain any small pustules at the tip of your finger, cut them and remove them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is not advisable that you cut the pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it hang down without annoyance.
Then apply to the wound old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then the dressing.
And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then that there is no longer any superfluity for the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk the juice, and the count as we have said.
If it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk the juice, and the count as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more;
And pierce it thus as the one before said, depending [it], then administer compresses with ointment and similar things, so that it rots what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleaned, then the dressing of ointment preventing flesh, until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and it is the scripture of their words.
To those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" be opened; And one does not make help by those, for those that all the veins and the pores of the patient are at those who have abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the almonds.
When the patient is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Therefore it is fitting, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four a small opening through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the opening of the syfac, not in the cartilage.
And this is suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough from it.
And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he extend the skin of the throat to all the way, then cut open the kernel as far as it comes to the channel. And avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
And is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel which jumps out of its place which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour is passed of which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew it all alone without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is sound.
Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the lung. Therefore cut on the epiglottis for those that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
And for this commanded the ancients to let the wound open until the malice of the illness is passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure it, until it was cured.
and I will tell you what I see. I see that a young lady took the knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
and I was called by her healer, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and knew well that it had not been cut vein nor led forward except to the throat, and the veins flowed through the wound.
I hastened and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healed;
and it happened to the young lady that she returned to her voice, and returned to her condition afterwards;
for because of this I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like a boil, and it is much in women;
and it is according to II manners: Nature itself, and accidents;
or Nature has no engine.
And the accident is according to II manners, one of which is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. And there is fear, and it is not proper to work fiercely except in that which is small, and the proof and search into all the intruder: If you find it like our fat, and cannot into any vein, if you cut it, as we cut the fat, and treat all its head, if there is any. And enclose well soon, and treat it as it is proper, until it is perfectly healed.
Many manners of us are there, of which I will say all the resemblances;
And now it is necessary for me to say all the difference which is between our and issue.
I say that an issue is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling (of pus) has passed, and is complete with rot; Then rest the fever and heat.
With the our (our) there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the pus, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large;
and are according to II appearances, or gray, or moist, and many of colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of this type of ailment, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," according to its shape and chapter which is after.
And the manner of incising (of) the abscesses of our is that you prick or more moist their place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, as long as you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then it shall be according to the greatness of the abscess;
then remove the instrument, and take care of those that may jump.
If moisture runs forth short, what color it has, treat it as I said with other abscesses;
and if after the instrument no moisture comes forth, know that it is fatty, so treat it in a cross shape, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape it from each side and guard the coat where it lies so that you may draw it out healthy with the nut;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
and if a little remains and the wound grieves you, use some sharp corrosive powders on the wound, and strain the wound, and place soothing things on top of the hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if it is large to us, then we sew the two lips of the wound, and care for that which generates flesh
and if the bleeding vein is contrary or other, then hurry and apply the place of powdered vitriol, and leave it for two or three days, as long as the wound suppurates, and rest the boiling of blood; then return to cover that which remains of the new.
See here the forms of the intromitting instruments, and they are in three ways. large and medium and small.
and there are three squares that are called 'albaret,' and one which is called 'breb,' and there are of three ways. large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
And they are also like the needles that one sews with for sorcerers, and are of citrine gold, or iron, or silver, and most valuable are those which are yellow, and are more experienced to be used against black pimples in order to enclose the borders of a fistula;
And they are of three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the needles are of many resemblances, as you see here:
and if needles which have two curvatures of three ways also;
and if needles which have three curvatures, and are also of three ways;
and if needles which have two curvatures, and needles of one curvature only, and are of three ways;
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these things to do are cutting, and there are some that don't cut more than one side, from which we scrape the flesh because for that reason we don't cut the vein nor the nerve.
And of these introducers are the alembles put back in handles so that the patient doesn't feel them at the opening of abscesses.
And they are of three ways. Large, small, and medium, as you see.
And one shouldn't use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and  groins, and similar places.
And never is the other instrument made small, seeming like scrapers of fists, according to this form, for which one stanches blood. And place it once at its place which is safe from cutting of the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so that they appear like a woman's breasts.
And remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he should be according to this form of these lines b. to g.: Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh from growing back, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and treat it until it is healed;
And if the breast leans down and is softened by its size as it happens with women, then make two cuts above it, in two similar slits; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b. up to line g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. and leave it until it has soaked up the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are types of hard scrofulas that have ribs, and some contain moisture.
Those therefore who contain moisture it behoves that they be cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and cure with ointment thereafter as long as it heals.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofulous sores, then treat it as we said for cutting into scrofulous sores, and if the wound is hollow inward, apply cautery as we said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is sealed, then many times abscesses occur, and this also happens to an inflamed vein and an abscess.
And if you know this is for the artery, then the abscesses are long formed. And when you feel it at your hips, so you feel a tightening.
And when this is for the vein, so there are red-colored appearances.
And it is foolish to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and arms and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to discard the iron treatment, and the one who is at the top should also be discarded, and in the one who is inflamed of an artery felt from above the skin long.
Then work the cut like incisions, and beautifully depart the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered.
Then put under it a needle, and let it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a doubled thread in II leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries which are in temples.
then point the place which is between the two ligaments of an intromittor as long as the pus that is there issues, and let be cut open the abscess;
then administer the cure that causes a bowel to close, as long as the ligament holds. then cure those of ointment coming after those, as long as it is sound.
and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand those that you can from the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and have the thread double so that you draw it from the other side. then tie the abscess as I told you, or bind of one of the two parts as two arms of the thread.
and if you doubt that the thread is not inserted far, reinsert another needle through all the pus and under the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in IV (four) lengths;
then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut the superfluity of the core and leave what is tied;
then put on the damp cloth in wine and oil, then administer care of poultices and ointments until it is healed.
As abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are burnt or by too much work, and similar things.
And these happen more often to assistants and to shoulders, and in all places where there are joints, and it is the painful abscess, and its color seems the color of the body, and is in many positions without pain;
and when one constrains it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not felt throughout the body, but only below the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above, and the one who is at the joints should not be covered with iron; For by chance there might go a contraction. and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin into a spatula.
and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin into a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root.
and if it is large, suspend it with the awl, and flay it, then drain it and stitch the wound together, and dress it until it is healed.
Sometimes in the belly and nowhere else a tumor occurs, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its appearance like a boil, and the root is subtle, and the head is large.
And there are some small and some very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and pus flowed from them.
I cut them open and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces, and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist and with fine roots; if the cup on the spatula is wide, and be in your presence the cautery to fire.
if the cup on the spatula is wide, and be in your presence the cautery to fire. For at the hip joint often comes too great a flow of blood, and if it does not stop, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient is frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a thread of wool well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for days.
and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the thread of wool until it closes the artery, and ceases by itself through labor.
and if the roots are large, you fear to close them entirely for the belly, but you can well close half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then cure the wound, and guard that you do not close the vessels which are of red color and poor in feeling and milk-colored.
For it is a festering abscess, and I will come to the cure of the ulcer afterwards.
When the tumor has increased If the appearance of the wound comes from cautery of a cut or splitting of the flesh, and is on the belly and in some places like those that occur in other cuts, or of blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what was said before, or of windiness.
And if it is from the rupture of the flesh and the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is for the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is scarred, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict at all.
And if it is due to blood, then abscesses open by these signs: they are large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity. and if it is for windiness, so feel to the touch, and the works are that you see if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
and if it is for windiness, so feel to the touch, and the works are that you see if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. So it is necessary that you leave the care. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then you must command the patient to hold his arm, and be stretched straight, then grasp all around the abdomen. then command him to groan softly between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upward to the entire large incision; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the us be bound by the linen;
then open half of the abscess extended over the linen, and put your index finger into it, and search for the intestine; If you find it caught in the cord, if untie it, and put the intestine out through the opening of the belly;
And if you find the boil, take it with the pincers, and cut off the excess;
And if the artery or vein goes against you, then go well around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you make it pierce;
Then strain the abscess onto four places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them in place as long as it pusses, and let the dead flesh fall away by itself; Or you cut it when it is subtle and pusses, then treat it as needed, and close the abscess as we have said.
Or you cut it when it is subtle and pusses, then treat it as needed, and close the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of it as is fitting, and solder the place.
of the ulcer We have said in the division the likenesses of sores, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron.
and let us say the sore originates in the marshes, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and ancients said that when sores are in a place where one can scrape it like a sore that is in the armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, and must be entirely removed when it is at the beginning;
no one has ever healed any of them before me.
And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge any time the patient of black mucus.
Then make him healthy if there is manifest swelling, then set the patient in a good place to do the work;
Then throw your pins or ulcers, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides with nothing left.
And let the blood flow completely out, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding of the blood is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it as long as the bleeding is extinguished; then the cure of other cure until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one should not touch with iron in these II similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hydropsarches, because it is a mortal thing;
therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, look at if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as flux and solution of the belly and similar things. If there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then do as follows: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spinal spatula according to this form: And be trenches of II parts. at the point, and anyway do not be so far in that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and you cannot bleed him;
then look if the dropsy is increased towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut under the belly three fingers right below the navel; and if the dropsy is from the disease of the liver, then let your incision be on the left side of the belly three fingers;
and if it is for the middle, whether to the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lie on the split so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand to the entire spatula between the skin and the fascia as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or until it enters;
then pierce the fascia as much as the spatula comes to the view, and that is the place of the water, then pull out the tool, and push this instrument from where it is in this form: And it resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of brass or archaut light metal, and at the bottom part there is a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and II from one side, and I from another;
and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that scribes cut the quill.
At the top above is the edge, so that when the instrument comes to the point, it descends now onto the instrument.
Empty therefore half or a third part, because if you empty more than is proper in that hour, by chance the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he approaches death.
But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse.
Then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is held now by the heart which stops the opening which is on the leaf, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner.
then begin again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat with water a small quantity.
do this no day, and guard yourself from pouring in so long as there remains but a little of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you give him a lot of water, so he cures of the grave or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and he stays pale. and he cures of drying medicines as long as he is well, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who have no holes in their penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
If this is necessary, then he must quickly be able to pierce all with a very fine spatula according to this form:
then put or pertu the subtle clo of plum, and tie it and hold it thus for III days or IIII and when he wants to make urine, so be removed the clo, and makes urine, and then put it back.
and perhaps it is not necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
The one whose hole is small, if it is medicated with the clo of flint as we have said, it will enlarge.
Those who do not have the prepuce in its place are pale, because none are born with the prepuce at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis. and cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum extended as far as the width of a feather, so that the prepuce falls in the middle, as it should.
And guard yourself against the flowing of blood which often comes, and if it happens, use the bandage of those who bandage blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times these albations come in the vein, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh;
and some are malignant and some are not.
So it is necessary that you prick them at the origin with a subtle needle, and cut and clean them all, then put soft cotton on top with Egyptian ointment. then cure it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is bad, of foul color and pus-filled, then you must bring a cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the albation is in the vein, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the albation which is inside first. and when it is fused together, then treat it with fire.
For when you cure it together, be sure the head of the bone is not pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in its shaft and groin.
so it is necessary to shave all that is black and corrupted, then cover it with a paste of honey and flour made from the bark of quince trees and vezies, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery helps in two types of arrangements together: that is to say, for the removal of blood and for corruption.
and if the head of the bone is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put or lead a chain of lead into the bone and urinate the patient among.
And when the skin is raw at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it behooves you to scrape it with the sharp instrument, until the bonds are untied, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides;
And if it is a painful thing to discuss these, then it behooves you to scrape it with the spatula on no point of the head of the penis and of the skin;
then carefully separate them, and place there the subtle cloth of linen moistened in cold water, so that it does not become raw again;
Circumcision is not a wound of continuous healing like the others. However, when we perform this work of our will, and properly on children, then it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for healing.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in the city, and with force, and with a whole knife;
since it was common for the foreskin to be two layers, and by chance if one cut above and the lower remained; Then it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and at the purification which is done in the city, the tip of the member is not well assured;
and at the purification of the penis by chance the iron escapes and the work is ruined, and many times they are born so that they do not need purification and I have seen it.
From the modification which is made by force to the whole line of filament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if they are equally sized throughout the whole soul it tightens; but that the child be well stretched over the skin;
And let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only doing to him tying the thread around the penis so much, and then make him rejoice in all the ways that you can;
then make him stand straight between your hands, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand to the penis and blow or heart, and pull it upward until the head of the penis is in. then clean it well of the filth which is gathered there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the one to the other lien;
then clean it well of the filth which is gathered there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the one to the other lien; and hold it as you will by the second tie to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two liens, then lift the head upward gently and pull the head of the penis; then let blood flow drop by drop, because it is the purest and put powder on and on the powder I drape it with a cloth of egg cooked without tempering with rose water, mixed with rose oil good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat it with other treatment as long as it is healed
The form of strength for fortification is this:
the two shoulders should be kept and be sharpened, and the shoulders also as large as the hand equally
The error of fortification is when the veins inside are at the incision;
therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the pus forms an abscess;
and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
And if they pass three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, let him leave it until the abscess is calmed, and lightly scrape it.
If you cut it as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Treat the wound then with powders from things we have said or treated of, and if you cut too much out and it goes above, it will do no harm.
Treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
holding back of urine
The retention of urine is from an obstruction of stone, or blood clotted, or bowel, or flesh growth, or similar things that we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released and you see that it is retained because of the stone which is in or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's arms as much as he can. and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine flows freely.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction to him with all the instrument which is called "syringe," of which this is the form:
and it should be of silver, finely worked and light, like the feather of a bird. and let the handle be a palm long and a half, and let it be thin at the head.
And the manner of extracting the urine is that you take a double thread and tie it to the head with a bit of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe.
And cut the superfluity of the fleece and put it to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin from egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
Then put the syringe gently on the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly;
Then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and let the patient feel it come until the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless for those who lead or where it goes is twisted;
Then the thread is put to all wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then it is extracted, and correct the urine.
And begin the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
When sores or blood come in the bladder, or there is rot assembled there, and you see them distill liquids and medicine, then do to all the instrument that is called “clepsedre,” and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three perforations: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
and the leaves are sewn together so that the medicinal ointment is such that it stops the member well without addition, if one can draw out moisture from it, and push when necessary;
and when you see to place your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and treat with the syringe that is inside;
If you draw the moisture with the catheter, and then push the syringe back in strongly; If moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the subtle form of the enema with which one enemas the bladder:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher.
and beneath to the groin where the limbs fall;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder in it, then tie it between the two breasts forming a band with a double thread, and heat the pot containing that moisture on the fire;
then put the head of the enema into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle in it, and pierce it roundly around. then put the strong thread into these pierced holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have just said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
and we have said the difference between a stone embedded in veins, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one must work with a saw; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often happens more to children, and this is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety.
and it opens the hare, and greatens the patient’s penis, and he often penetrates it, and then bends over. And with many of these leaps, the foundations are broken.
And it is light for the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in old men, and it is as much the middle, to those who are between youth and old age.
And the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the mucus that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and thrust them out and move them downwards, so that the hip descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it protrudes from its high place.
Then make him sit between your hands, supported, and his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards.
Then place it and touch it inside.
If you feel the hip in the space, then hasten now to cut into the hip.
And if it does not fall to the touch at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent. and thrust it into its base, and place the hip, and when you feel it with your finger, then move it towards the neck of the bladder;
Then press on your back, and thrust it out to where you want to cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where one makes the cut.
Then he thrusts the spatula cutting, which is its shape: And make between those that are between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip.
And be straight over the stone, and your backsides be close or foundation, and be the cut through so that it is wide outward, and inward narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
By adventure the press if the back which is or foundation, that it jumps out without work.
and know that there are such stones which have angles, and edges: if they are cut to be removed.
and if there is one that is soft, resembling a gland, and round, whose passage is light.
To those then which have angles and edges, make the cut larger;
and if it does not come out, then you must extract it with tweezers which are also like a file at the head, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape. or you put below the instrument subtle bent at the head;
and if you cannot manage it this way, then enlarge the opening of the wound, and if the blood does not come out, then strain with vitriol.
and if there are more than one stone, then put the largest one first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then the tract, and the smaller ones afterward if there are more.
And if it is very large, then it must be sewn up, and a larger wound must be made. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes back through where his bowels cannot hold it.
but nonetheless, you must try to treat him, or to break up the pliers, as long as you pull it apart in pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put on top of it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bind the patient's neck, and do not untie the band until the third day.
And when you reduce it, then arise well its place of oil and water, then the cure of diaphynicon ointment and basilum ointment, until it be healed.
And if an abscess arises in the wound and corruptions, and blood clots in the bladder, and as a result the urine is retained, which is known in this manner that it does not flow with the urine: Therefore put your point in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause it to rot.
Then lift the wound clean and dry and of silk, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, you tie its two thighs together, and apply the medicines on top of the wound.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage leading from the penis, and caught there, and urine cannot pass; then treat it as I say now, that you cut it many times, and excuse the cutting through this treatment. I have already proven this thus.
Take one piece of iron in this form, and let it be shaped like three angles fastened to one stick.
Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
Then push the forest onto the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone. And turn the forest in your hand at the stone poke and poke, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side;
If then comes forth the urine, then press your hand on that which remains of the stone which is within the rod. If it then breaks, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this because of any obstacle that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and the other above, then make the rod straight against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the threads, and cleanse the coagulated blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It sometimes happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever happens, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-knowing who discovers herself to her midwives, even when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands;
and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of a man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands it, then you must procure a midwife well-knowing, and at pains find one, and if you cannot find one, then take no unchaste midwife;
and present to him a woman who is well-versed in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her that she do what you command him concerning the inquiry of the stone; and look carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and look carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it befits him to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, then she forces it under her finger, and he recommends that she put her finger or on the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming.
If she finds it, then it befits that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh;
then stop on the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the buttock, where it is seen to appear, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his hip above or below the stone, and let the waist be at first small;
and do not move his hip above or below the stone, and let the waist be at first small; then push the loin in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can pass out, and know that many kinds of stones are there:
that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins.
If you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not come out, put in its place powdered vitriol, and hold it there for an hour as long as the wound is stained;
then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have instruments that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you in your work;
and if the vein is injured and it's from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the place and bind it with bandages and don't start again with this, and leave the stone and don't milk it at all, lest the patient die by chance. then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the parts are dried, return to your work, as long as the stone remains in place.
White viscous is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white phlegm that is from the center of the bowels, which contains the egg;
and is called "phlegm," and it is properly found in the lining of the egg if one thinks that this is the other egg; and this is the skin of the bowels between the white phlegm that we have said;
and these do not have a similar name. And the generation of this branch is of weakness that comes from the genitals, and that matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the bowels, and this moisture can have many colors; or when it is colored declining to jaundice, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe,  it is long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the edges, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason people think that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the edges and the white like that, then one feels it well.
therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe at all the intercessor quarreling, from which its form is before. According to this then which comes after the introducer, judge of what is within.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his ability and the replenishment of his body;
then place him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the bones;
then take the spoon-shaped tool, and cut the skin of the bones along their length up to near the armpit, and let your incision be entirely straight dividing the skin of the bones until you reach the white bone, and gently peel it according to your ability;
then pierce the white bone plainly with water at the large opening, and draw out all the water, then put your tweezers in, and extend the white bone upwards;
and do not touch the root of the testicles, but only the scrotum; cut all or in parts the  ribs with subtlety, that if you do not cut them wisely, the fluid will return.
and if the bladder is in your work, place it back when you have completed the work of the scrotum.
then join together the two leaves of the root of the testicles with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the bladder corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels which are suspended, doubting the discharge of blood.
then cut the testicle with all its suspender, and extract the bladder, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fluid is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two veins. if you strike the other part just as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound a soft cloth moistened with rose oil.
if you strike the other part just as you did the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound a soft cloth moistened with rose oil. and put another woolen cloth moistened with wine and oil on top, and place the two bandages on top, and put doubled cloths above, and tie it over the entire bandage according to this form:
Then take two cloths and employ them with wool fleece according to this resemblance and they should be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation until the back, and the other at the armpit;
and the other two chiefs over the two arms, and be all assembled the restraint in the buckle of the breeches;
and at no time is medicine this cauterization in place of an iron scalpel, and it is that you take the cultellary cautery subtle, and strike the skin of the groin, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is uncovered;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce it at once at that point, and burn it with this subtle cautery hot:
And cup in all ways you can, as long as you scrape everything clean;
and keep that the fire does not touch the eye;
and know that this work is more healing; and make sure guarding against blood loss, and cut the work of size;
and if nothing else goes against you, or an abscess forms or blood loss or anything else, then cure what opposes you according to that which is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that the aquatic root is there, then make the patient sit on the elevated seat; Then pierce the abscess in the area below to the entire width of the spatula, and place the perforation through the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide so that all the liquid flows out.
Then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and allow the remaining liquid to drain, then treat it until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you pour a quill or instrument used to treat water in dropsy, whose form is described earlier.
And enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the liquid returns, and is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, so will the patient's days pass.
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, for which it seems to me better one leaves it.
and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and even from the genitals; and this is by many causes.
That is to say by excessive sour and sharp humors which are spread to the genitals, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not feel pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by adventure there are some grievous abscesses porous and pithy, and of a dark color, and sometimes comes from the outside of an artery, or from an inflammation of a vein.
When it is through an artery, then it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And it does not behoove you to touch it.
The one who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its arrangement at the touch of the fingers, and you can well do the incision on this resemblance, and on the other veins. And it is that you cut the core of the veins, then the point is on top, and the thread of white sephac, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the point.
If the point is already joined with these veins, then it behooves you to draw the point, and cut.
And if it is attached to the sephac, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all that vein, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the cartilage is or their rear, then you must cut it all out and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your works are completed, so apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
This is an abscess enveloped in a covering resembling the burgeon, with the softening of the boils, and it moves painfully when the patient walks.
and the cure of this malady is as well prepared as fearsome as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It behooves you to make the patient sit on a high seat, then bring the suspensory of the hips down to your knees, over all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters bind them, and extend them in shape.
then cut with a broad sharp spade through the area of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
then he inserts a needle where there is the double thread, and ties it to the first place where the worm came, and ties it straight to the other end. then he cuts them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and pulls out the corrupt moistures.
then he cures the wound as with the others where one injures a bowe, so that no vessel spills that nourishes one of the corners.
for by this comes no harm, and if to all the vessels comes life, it is necessary to draw the corners to all the vessels. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment for the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
The happening of this ramic so is by the section that comes or where it is placed, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners.
And this rupture is either by a blow or from an extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes.
Or from percussion, or from a jump, or from pulling, or lifting of heavy weights, and similar things.
And the signs when it is from an extension of the blow are that they happen poco a poco, over a long time, and do not come suddenly. And is the abscess even up to the armpit, because the blow tightens the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the sifac, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and are the abscesses diverse appearing, under the skin near, and it is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the sifac.
And sometimes the intestines are trapped with the bowels, and held in there, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron fear, for which it is necessary to avoid it.
And the manner of treatment is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into the wound with his hand if he can. Then it should be supported on his neck between your hands and lift his hips.
Then is the heart above, and cut all the skin of the nails long. Then put inside the leaves of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue.
Then scrape the skin that is under the skin of the nails, until the white flesh is uncovered on all sides.
Then put your two index fingers in that which follows the nail, in that which is between the white flesh which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second flesh, and depart from what is behind the egg, and between the second flesh.
And then move with your right hand inside the heart of the nails, and be the white flesh on top to your left hand, and raise the egg to all the flesh toward the waist. And instruct the minister to extend the arm upwards, and untie what is behind the bandage.
And feel his flanks if he has any bowel wrapped or white and hard lump, and if you find none of these things, then bring him to the belly below.
Then take a needle or it has the thick thread made of X threads, and bring it into the back part of the lump, which is after the skin of the groin. After the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are IV threads. Then join them one upon the other in manner of a cross, and tie the lump, which we have said is below the skin of the groin, with a strong band of two parts. Then wrap the shoulders with threads, and bind them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter within, lest any abscess come there. and place the strip directly according to the first strip long two times that of the other one, and after these two strips leave down the soft part which is below the breast of the thighs the greatest of a two. and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries;
then cut in the part which is below the skin of the thighs, as much as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before;
then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it in the wounds, and place the strip that we have said. And sometimes is cauterized the whites (as we have said), after the incision, for fear of  discharge of blood. For this happens many times, and leave the strip until it dries by itself;
and if he delays in sitting, he should be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of flesh hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the root that is joined to the living body, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting lightly above or below;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess with those who work, as long as the vessels bleed;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens them;
and do not remove any of the intestines from the bowels, and if they are removed, it is a little, and repair them every hour.
And nevertheless if it remains too long in this point, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines descend.
And this happens by the extension of the abscess which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen its parts and open.
And the cure is thus by cautery, as we have said before.
And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner: And it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflamed to the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then extract the abscess which is under the skin that follows it, then take the rail and put it on the place appearing of the abscess.
And you press to the bottom of the belly, then sew the two appearing parts of the abscess above the head of the rail, and sew both.
Then withdraw the head from its socket and do not cover the wound or extend the limb or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of a hernia. Then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and care for the wound until it is healed.
The incision is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because those things that are within are softened, and it becomes visible.
And it is necessary, when one wishes to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and one cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin;
then bring together the two lips with one suture, and if you see it, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three sutures or four firmly;
then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
Through chastisement
Know that cauterization is common in our law, and for this reason I would like to not speak of it in this book;
and it is only necessary for two manners:
one of which is that the physician knows how to answer when asked, and in his wisdom cures.
and the other, because we often need cautery from some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals.
Therefore, I say that cautery is done according to two manners: or by traction, or by splitting.
In the one we perform by traction, make the animal sit in hot water until the joints are softened and pliable; then grasp them with your hand, until they are put back and you no longer feel them.
Of the chastisement of size: it is necessary that you hold the animal steady, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut above each opening at the top, when you have well scraped them;
and leave no pore through which the soft fat and the fine fat that is on the vessels may escape.
and this manner of chastisement is better than the one done by traction, because in traction, perhaps nothing remains from the joints, so that the animal desires lust;
then cure the wound until it is healed.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is according to II manners as men: one if it is that between the two sexes appears also as the figure of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.
And the other manner is in women, and it is on the pointed part as well as a rod, and they will conceive.
And the care of the man and of the woman is that you cauterize the joined parts together, and cure them as other wounds.
in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Tentigene is a joined part above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its cure.
It behooves that you singe the superfluity of the tentigene to your hand or as one does, and cauterize it lightly;
and do not move it too much, so that bleeding does not come, then the treatment of other treatments until it is healed;
and to another ulcer that is born at the mouth of the gums, and the lip, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this they called it in the ancient 'cow disease'. If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the treatment, and the cure until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small. and is natural by birth, or accidents by illness that came to it;
and is natural by birth, or accidents by illness that came to it; or it is due to joint disease, or syphilis subtle or thick, and is made by movement in the gums, or ribs, or under, or wherever it may be;
and prevent conception, and childbirth, and by chance flowers to have.
and the knowledge of these things is by the regard of the bailey.
If the swelling is appearing close by, if you want to [place it] on either side or to the back.
If it is subtle of syfac, and it is close to the two books, then you hurry, and say thus:
Put your two finger indices together, and the woman be upon her back, legs spread.
Then are the two books formed, as long as the subtle syfac is round, and be covered the stupor;
Then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it upon the place, and lie the woman at home every day, so that she cannot stir.
And if the stylus is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with the spatula seeming to a myrtle leaf.
If the stupor is of flesh born, then suspend it to the onech and the cope;
and have the blood-stopping medicines, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and a bundle of egg.
then administer a wide bandage of cloth, so that the wound may not close.
and thus it is kept long, and administer a tent of dry linen;
then be cured with other dressings until it is healed.
And when in the marsh comes a new birth, it is necessary to cover according to this manner, if it is not abscesses inflamed. For the abscess that is inflamed which is in the marsh, one must not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without usual care, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened.
and we have already said in the division the similarities to them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve curing.
I say that hemorrhoids and boils, when they are inflamed in the flesh, and they do not appear to the touch, except for by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those one can cure.
It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the hardened part with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder with blood-stopping medicines such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then puts his feet to the wall for an hour, then puts it in cold water.
and if there comes a decorrment of blood, then make him sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confection it with honey and aisil, and make an emplastrum of it on his back.
And if he strains, it is good. If this is not the case, make him apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without hurting.
Then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in lingonberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess is quiet, treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
And the one called "albathir" is red and is similar to sharp resin, so it should be covered as I have said before. and then treat until it is healed.
Many ways of abscess come in the marsh, such as boils and cancerous abscesses and herpe and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not like abscesses that boil;
and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether this abscess is hot at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. Therefore, do not hurry too much to pierce, but let it mature until the pain is appeased;
and then have the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he leans, and supports his back and brings his legs together towards the sides of the leg.
and let his thighs be spread out, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage;
Then succeed the thrust towards the right rib, and there administer the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the channel, so that afterwards comes the form.
And it is necessary that when you see administer this instrument, that you first make the thrust in order to know the depth of the channel, so that what enters within the instrument does not come more deep than it must, and that it does not harm the patient; And if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the channel with cloths so that the instrument does not harm him;
And it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument above, and that he holds the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the spatula level.
And when the wound is emptied, it is necessary that you put in the wound tender cloths moistened in rose oil, or in green-colored dry oil;
And place the cloth further from the wound to the edge of the margin, and place outside above the margin and on the linen blade net moistened in water or mallows being boiled.
Then care for it after two days of ointment coming up to this, until it is healed;
And at no time lift the margin and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristida being boiled; Then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is put back in its place, then you should guard against cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first at the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air;
Therefore, the child should quickly move with force Therefore, know that this infant's birth is according to the natural form, and it is born under its head, and the second follows him;
And when you see these signs, it is proper to gently press his belly so that the child comes out quickly.
Because when he descends upon his head, the second follows him, and the womb is freed of its superfluities by good purification.
and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes on his feet, and comes toward the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes on his belly, or groin, and is converted by chance onto his neck, and by other bad figures;
so it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help them.
If the child comes on his head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth hard, and the virtue of her is weak, then she make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her;
and rouse her nature of oil or fennel is cooked, and then put the healer between her thighs the small spatula whose form is here: and split the secondary bone, and cut to its nail until the moisture which is inside it exits.
and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek with sesame oil.
then make her take and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: then now extract the child.
And if the two hands come out first, then it is necessary that you gently pull them little by little; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up high; then unseat the stool on the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the unsitting.
And if the hand cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the elbow that is before mentioned, and extract the child, and reset it evenly.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes upon its feet, then it should be pushed upward. and then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
Then pull it by the feet and extend it back and forth.
When he jumps to his hips, then command him to take hold, and make him sneeze from congestion. If it were to jump further, God willing.
And if it is not good as we have said, so turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. Therefore then there is lightly.
And if it does not come further as we have, then say take muscle of aloe and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the woman's inside nature and outside this ointment, then make her sit in a deep well until below the ribs;
And when it is softened beneath, make a collar of mirr, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour. Then make them sit on the seat, then make them sneeze and restrain their mouth and nose, and gently grasp their belly, for the child now jumps.
of the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, put the basin on their hands back and forth; then be sewn to their neck, and let their feet hang down, and lie down on the bed; and bend their hands back and forth, and then take their hands on their belly, and take away the cushions beneath, until she is well prepared down below; and if the child does not jump, take their feet and move them, then move their belly upward, and then put your hands in. and beat the child peck and peck; and command the woman to prepare herself until the child is born.
of the issue of the child who comes out with a hand wide It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up, and go away.
If she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and straighten out her legs;
then administer the poultice that I have recounted.
And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and beat the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and command her to prepare herself until the child is born.
of the birth of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned toward the back of his mother It is necessary that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it peck and peck, and beat it lightly;
And when it is even, put on its muscle tissue of altitude and oil, as we have said, then command him to move it a little here and there.
And when you will have done this, put the part on its seat, and command him to feel it. And then make the part sneeze. in this same manner to all the spine
in this same manner to all the spine When it comes to be done in this manner to the whole joint, cut the joint with your fingernail, until the moisture is evacuated.
And if the child cannot rise on his face and neck, then cut the skin of the wound so that it is not held back, and kill the child.
Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as it is right, and command the woman to feel it no time.
of the issue of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four. And this is not a strange thing, and it happens often. Two are strange things, and do not live, if they are named;
Two are strange things, and do not live, if they are named; I know these, that they be multiplied, and are destroyed by the power that divides them, which is linked to the womb;
and sometimes they come forth as naturally as one each under, as we have said.
And if they come forth struggling, so the cure as we have said, and let the midwife be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make thus as he will cure to health. of many children
No times are formed in the marshes I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more until XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff knows all this because perchance similar things happen; if made according to what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; if it is fitting that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an accident or she has fear of death;
if it is fitting that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips be inclined down, and the legs raised;
and the minister the braid from the two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not pulled at the descent of the child
then rub the mouth of the mare's with moist oils with marshmallow and fennel seeds and flaxseed, then anoint the bailiff his hands with these oils and these poultices
then put them in the mare lightly, then quench the place where she puts her hooves to be convenient for them, and take guard if the child is appeared that it descends upon its head
if put the hooves in its eyes or on its neck or in its mouth or under its tongue or beneath the beard or in the groin or near the ribs, and if the descent is upon feet, put it where the pin prick and at the middle ribs
and it is convenient that he braids the hoof with his right hand, and put the crook between his two of the left hand, and put it into all his hand lightly, and put the hoof in any of these places that we have said, as long as it comes to the thing empty
then fit against the other onchne, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then make them equal in moving from one side and the other, so that they may slip easily, and let the onchnes be toothed so as to hold well, as it is here the form:
And if one part remains, then oil the root with some of its oil, and put it in that part, and draw the other part;
and if none remains, then put this onchne or higher up, and do so until it comes all out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back for the tightening, then you must wrap it on the blanket until it comes out all; then hold the head in the joint of the foot or on the knife, and thus you must do with the other hand, and at II feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if there is a sharp chief assembled, then you must insert the pointed spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the sharp. or you will do it with the instrument that is called "almidach", so that the shape comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one.
and thus the same if the child has a large head naturally.
and then pull the bones with the tongs, and if the head jumps out and is strained to the forceps, then it is broken, as long as the moisture which is at or lower exit.
and if it cannot move, cut it up into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the mare is light.
And if it is protruding in the belly or breast, it is necessary that you draw it out with the cloth wrapped around your hand. and bind the belly or breast, until the moisture inside runs out.
and if the other members are broken and the shoulder remains, put the basin in their palm with the mouth of the basin facing up, and draw it up to the mouth of the basin. then put the pincers or tongs into it, and pull it out forcefully.
And if the mouth of the basin is narrowed because of the hot abscess that has come there, it does not need to be worked on. It is necessary instead to administer moist and fatty things And the minister plasters, and soak them in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, administer those that we have said for a living child.
And if one has no power, then it is treated in pieces, and nothing of the second part is left.
And when you have done this, administer those that we have said for boils that come in the marsh.
And if bleeding comes, then it is put in restraining water, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead, then she conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other. After a long time he came to have an abscess on his head, and it swelled so much that it opened and began to discharge pus greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not solder the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong traction, and out came one bone, and after some days another. I was much amazed, because this one whose belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound, and treated with my hands bones, as long as the woman was in a better state; And the woman lived for a long time like this, and it came to be a little bump of bone from there.
and I have recorded this chapter for those who, when the masters find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.
Here after comes the form of the pressor, as it is written in books;
and to its turning as to the two shoulders of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and its mouth of the barrel it must be wide, and the edge of the trees it must be long one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same barrel, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or an inch more.
and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the collar to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of tongs. and has two arms adjusted, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the matrix with the entire instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then put the two arms adjusted together in the matrix, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then operate your hand with the entire instrument, as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the matrix, as long as the patient does what she wants.
This instrument is all mounted, and are multiplied their appearances; And when the mirrors show them clearly, then it is more demanding the work, and higher for men because of their quantity.
If you do not despise the tool that you may have prepared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it behooves you to command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze forcibly, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose. And if she leaps for this, well is.
If that does not happen, then take a pot, and make an incision or coverlet, and put herbs there that may open the mouth of the uterus, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury. All these herbs, or any of them, be boiled or stewed in water on the fire;
Then put a cane or opening of the pot, and the other chief in the mouth of the uterus, and keep it so that the vapors come inside the uterus.
then make him sneeze, as we have said. If the back of the hip jumps suddenly.
And if it remains after this cure and there is no force, command the woman to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in the juice of rue, and then put it into the vagina, and pull on the second time; and when she has found it, seize it and extend it back and forth gently so that the strings do not tear during extraction;
but it should be moved gently left and right, and then pull. Then it will come out and disentangle itself.
And if the opening of the vagina is too narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigating with herbs.
And if she is not cured by all that we have said, then beware that you do not pull
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the uterus, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then the cleanse with ointment tetrafarmascon. if she endures and puts it back, and comes for;
but nevertheless, when she endures this, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and paleness occurs to the patient. Therefore it is necessary fumes suitable to these;
none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and of the second is this.
And is to be seen resembling a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the fire, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the embers, and the wool until it is scorched, and begin another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but rather have it stopped by some subtle syphons; Therefore it befits the surgeon to pierce him with that instrument in its place, and do not pierce him at all with a sharp spatula, and guard the bandage so that she does not touch it.
Then place upon the wound half in wine and oil, then the ointment's cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will return, then put or place a piece of wood, and leave them hands for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
And at no time comes this stoppage of a wound or an abscess; Therefore it befits to cover that stoppage. If it is cured, as we have said of the chain of flax.
Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodules, and greater than those that come near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
And when that nodule is ancient, it works, and in short moisture white or subtle boils, and at no time are these fistulas pierced.
And they are known by those who have experienced it or by flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps in jumping some of them go out.
And if to fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half the penis; and reach up to the junction of the groin, and up to the knot of the scrotum.
And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the base, and not penetrating; and it is that you insert your index finger or base, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then you insert a tent of fine linen or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no coming out of pus or windiness or humors, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; if you hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, then the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced as far as the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes as far as its place; if there is no twisting and the invention of pain around it, then it is that there is something added below it, and it does not take medicine or treatment by ointment;
and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and vanity of foolish mirrors that intervene.
In the one that is not persistent and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
And raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly. Then put a tent of lead, or of plaster if there is curvature, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, then it is necessary that you put your index finger on it, if you feel then that the tent has pierced it.
And be discovered where you feel between your finger the sifac or the flesh, then you know that she is pierced. If it does not travel with this one cannot heal it.
One says nevertheless that one can heal them well, but this happens little.
And the aid one does it if one scalds the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; And put all hot in the fistula, until it comes near to the foundation. And do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred parts are burned, which look like an owl's feather;
And then cure it with damp tents in butter, until those charred parts are gone, then cure it with ointment containing sulfur and lead.
If he is thus healed, that is well.
If this cannot be healed otherwise;
And if the tent goes in and does not reach to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of charcoal or  syphax, and you see the fistula following this covering toward the heart; Then cut at the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then use the cautery after it until it reaches the top of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and will fall;
then  remove those feathers that seem like an ostrich feather, and no remaining any.
And if the wound festers, and it comes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery assembles two things good: that is to say, the burning of those joined hairs, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture.
then the cure of tents moistened in butter or in ground hazelnuts, until the wound is covered, and if the hairs are burned in the bottom;
then cure the wounds of those swollen eyes by applying a hard dry dressing, and they are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to right through the bottom of it, and is separated from the body, then you cut it at its base or foundation, and ask about those.
If you feel the tent and there is between it the linen or the silk or hairs, and it is close to bursting, then there is no other way but by the administration of one of these three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put dressings on it and treat it as before.
and do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the eggs flow by their own volition. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the membrane after it is cut from below its foundation, or by dressing or another pointed instrument. then carefully remove the fatty tissue in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation.
then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation. so it will be a lighter thing for the patient.
And at no time are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the base near the skin above, then take a perforated tent at the head according to this form: And it puts the thread wrongly into the second, and pushes the tent all along the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is inserted into the edge of the base inside, then you should extract the thread of the one pierced, as when you put your own or base.
and treat the head with thread, and assemble the two shoulders together, and bind them to each other, and let it so for a day or two;
and restrain it no times, as long as the threads cut these flesh that are between two, and shrink;
then cure the wound as long as it is soldered and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep. For it is not fitting to make a bandage cover them if they are pierced, and then treat them, as we have said, until they are healthy.
The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very strong, one part and trenching; and on the other part no, for this reason one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhages are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short near blood, and there is one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
but those that are outside have little moisture, and yet inside or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of flesh;
and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch in order to go into chambers, as long as the foundations are gone, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and can hold it with tongs, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with cloth, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder over some hot powders that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said or chapter of cautery, then cure them with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, then make a suppository for the patient with a biting and harsh suppository to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly; if the patient cannot bear it, and if the threads are far from the foundation, then the treatment is light;
if the patient cannot bear it, and if the threads are far from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and you shall seize them with your finger or pliers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron. It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner:
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pass through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be of a wide;
and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood;
Then put on the foundation, a piece of soft cloth in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until they are healed, and when they are closed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are well.
Of the drying of the veins or foundation Many times there is drying of humors within the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not work. If it is necessary to scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the crust above, so that it does not become moist. Then cure it until it is cured as it is necessary.
And if it cannot heal, then begin scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and becomes scabby. Then cure it until it is healed.
Of trembling A foment is a small appearance of pus around the body, and goes well inward;
And sometimes the vein is found cold, and it feels like death from numbness, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a stalk of an owl feather, or a strong vulture feather, and put that stalk on the numbness, until the purple circles feel the numbness all around. Then turn your hand on the whole stalk until you wrap all around the numbness, and put it in completely, and scrape the numbness from its roots.
And if you see, so make this one of an iron or steel chain according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above: Do not pierce it, for if you do it will hold at the vein, and you will squeeze it more.
And if you see it, then cauterize the numbness as it is in the chapter of cautery before this one.
Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or arch-gold, or melted lead or maillet.
and at times one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. Therefore those who are given to administer in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Therefore those who are given to administer in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The shape of the clyster is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied in this manner:
and if one has a severance where the belly is tied together, as you see, and the shoulder blade is pierced inside;
and has two pierced on one side of the rib cage, and one on the other;
and the belly where one puts medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and has between each hole one doit of spacing, then put into these holes one strong thread of twisted thread in the shape of an X or otherwise around, and assemble the belly as it is a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, then tie the end with a strong thread in front, and then clisterize;
and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with clyster of oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently; then squeeze the ministers with both hands together until it is all mixed, then withdraw the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to go out, so let it go as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night long, then there is greater help.
And if you clench it for a malady of stomach ache, and the medicine comes out quickly, then he starts again until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base or an abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster that the skin should be tightened with;
We have just said in the division the cure of wounds;
Or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and from how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and the edge of a sword and knife, or spear or club or arrow, or similar things.
Or that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
And I will tell you the cure of each wound, and will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you guard yourself because it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly an abscess hot: if the head is bled forthwith if it comes little blood from the wound, and let the bloodletting be opposite to the afflicted part
and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and thick meats.
And if he does not want to be bled, then let his meat be lessened, and drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;
and if there is no abscess there, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I shall say a little after;
and if the air has moved it, put on some ointments, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large as of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tents, then assemble them by stitching, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the stitch.
If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds on only by a bit, then cauterize it. Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore tough flesh in its place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as tests and cooked wheat, also pulses, and similar things.
And if you find rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cauterize all the rottenness, and throw out the pus, then heal it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cauterization, and it cannot be stanched by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then their cure is light: and it is that you put within this powder which joins as if the fire had melted it.
And the manner of the powder is: Take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powder it finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with coal alone, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but that the fire has cauterized the wound.
And if the fire has cauterized the wound, even if it is still open, then one does not put any of this powder;
but apply some digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour, water and honey, until it heals well. Then the cure of other cures until he is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it alone and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
but let the medicine be warm, such as chaulmoogra oil washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cupped laurel also washed in sweet water, and other medicinal stones in this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, so sew it together and tie with bandages, then treat until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is full of pus, then pierce or lower than.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows, then stop it, tie it, and cauterize as is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduit is guarded, so that the flesh goes through, then sew the heart onto the throat bone, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. And then restrain it properly, and leave it for a few days, then cure it with soothing ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then fill it. And if there are pieces of bone, try to pull out all the ones that you can, and those that you cannot get, leave them until the wound dries up and is aligned properly.
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have said. And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
If it's a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, see if air escapes from the wound as the patient breathes. Then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it up so that the blood does not clot, returning to the heart, and killing the patient. But put on attractive ointment, and reapply it twice a day;
And if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on their wound for three days, or four, or more. if there does not come any spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor straining of wing. and when you see the good dispositions, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat then with tents and other treatments, as long as it is healing;
and if it cannot heal, and work, then you know that there is a fistula;
then treat it as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it as described above. if it is large, suture it;
and if it is small, cover it with powder, and if it is deeply set in the bone, and has broken pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not severed, let the wound rot, it will lessen the extractions
and for other wounds on other members judge as we have said.
of the displacement of the belly
The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines come out, by which the intrusion of others;
and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the large one, for this reason one puts the intestines back in with more care, if they are not put back in hot to hot.
for that reason the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they go in with more care, and for this reason the middle wound is worse, for this reason one resets the intestine to its place just like the others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IV manners.
The II sutures common occur in the suture of the belly, and the suture of other wounds of the body and II other sutures proper are common to other wounds;
And nevertheless they are more clean with the suture of the belly, and I will say one each and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has been outside, and it is necessary to stitch, it is by one of the II manners: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated by the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: half a sponge or I soft cloth in hot water only, or you cook it in hot wine with cinnamon and cloves, and raise the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
and sometimes doing this restraining, it is moved that  it alone for deflating.
And when you see the swelling departing, if moist the intestine of water or ale and bad be cooked, for by this it is aligned the entrance to a little thing.
and if it cannot enter, then make a hole in the wound with the instrument of which one cuts hemorrhoids.
and the first cure is to move the tail, that one should not cut it without great necessity.
and this is the tool for splitting it.
if trench inside in the curve and outside not, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has leapt out, set it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you are able, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, then it behooves you to make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your intention in that the sunken part be higher than the other.
and thus it behoves to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
Little wounds are placed where you have appeared, then hold in your hands the minister pitiful that holds all the rupture with his hand, and bring together the lips.
And this is the common way of stitching, and is that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one point of space, and there put a needle where it has the good strong thread; And pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the suture which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that side, and bring together the two heads of the suture the four assembled.
Then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then bring together the two ends of the wound in agreement, and then leave one point of space, and there put another needle;
Then take the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what you need needles for, until all the wound is restrained.
And let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because fine needles cut all the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot enter well: Therefore, they should be medium-sized.
And it is not good to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture;
And then trim the ends of the needles so they don't hurt the patient when they sleep, and put tents or cloths on the needle points to keep them in place, and leave them there until the wound is closed;
And this way of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because only one or two needles are needed.
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the jaw together with a needle to which there is a strong medium thread.
And when you have pierced these four bones together, then turn the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews the fabrics.
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a minor vein two;
This suture sews a man, and I sewed a wound on one's belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it had intestines well two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound was healed up to XV days, and I treated it, and he became healthy.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and do not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and lay on top of the wound cotton old twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
take the needle and pass it from the outside part to the inside;
when it has pierced the flesh straight through, lay the head of the thread on the spot where you have passed the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside out;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier sews furs, and that you leave the thread on one side once, and take it from the other, until the stitch is completed.
The second manner of suture, as Galens says properly, is like any wound which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one end to the other end, in this way:
Insert a needle or point of mirache nearby, and have it pierce the place only, and leave the two ends of the suture. Then turn the needle, and have it pierce from the outside part to the inside, with the two ends of the suture.
Then have it pierce one and both from the outside to the inside, with two other points of mirache that are on the other side.
And this is the middle manner of suture and the most common.
Galens says this word, and no one contradicts it, one must suture the belly with two needles, or there be thread in each.
and one must thrust one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corrodaries.
and know that when the rupture is in the belly, the suture is more grievous than of the other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as soon as the arterie has moved, then put back the intestine and stitch.
then put on powder enfearing flesh, and if the arterie has moved, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound heals. And stitch the thread, and join the skin, and the cartilage. Then heal the wound as with others, until it is healthy;
And if you have no medicines, put on it at once as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healthy.
For you have no need for other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound does not make community with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a soft cloth in oil of temperate heat, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits;
And if it feels pain or rot in the bowels, and this happens many times, then you should administer enemas of dark wine, even if the rot comes to the intestines;
and pierce it inward, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is because of the placement of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as far as the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has become black or worm-eaten, then you must tie the place that is black so that bleeding does not come from it, for there are veins and arteries.
then cut what is between the two, and place the two ends on the part below the wound until outside to align the extraction when the worm falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people because I have seen a man who was pierced in the belly by a spear;
And was the wound on the right of the stomach, and was infected and became a fistula, and in it there was evacuation and flatulence.
I treated it according to what I could, and did not cease until it was healed, and the edges joined.
And when I saw it join, I feared that the patient had badly in his belly; and he felt no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank.
And said any experimenter that when it has a small wound in the intestine, that it must be bound in such a manner: Take fresh strips of linen, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the strip has covered the opening, put it on the two lips so that it pulls its mouth upwards;
And then the physician cuts the head, and it is held so that it cannot be separated, then he puts the other fragment afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely taken. And sew the wound.
That chief if it is ardent in the intestine, and there comes no nuisance to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast, in such manner:
Take the chief of this thread of intestine that is well cleaned, and then tie to the chief of this thread the fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it in the rupture.
And this manner of sewing of fragments is not worse than according to the way of trust and hope;
And if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the main intestines, there is nothing nor health, except subtlety.
of fistula wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is closed and goes inward.
And a fistula is according to truth a knotted fault hard and white, where one feels no pain, and is also pointed like the feather of an eye.
and sometimes in clear bow, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the IX causes: that is to say, by the smallness of blood or body. or for its evil. or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, that does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much moisture. or the limbs are spoiled, and the matter is of bad quality. when the medicine is not good in the cure or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is tardy for digestion, and tardy for healing, and inflated by nature; or there are veins or bones.
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is therefore necessary for me to teach you the treatment of fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; For there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sifac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it is such that it comes from the property of the principal member, and similar ones.
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of evil healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in its cure, and you want to know it, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, so if it is curved;
and if the fistula is twisted, then take a search of a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends and goes around the twistiness;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, then have it clattered through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and purifies it;
then search carefully with your power that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is covered by them, and ask the patient well of the pain that he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the bad matter and corrupted flesh that are within;
and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep from right place, then it befits that you cut it deeper, as much as you can, then put moist bandages in medicinal water, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is lodged at the bottom;
and then put dressings of sound flesh, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed by these means, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it.
If a vein or nerve does not touch or principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then cover it as long as the corruption is completely removed, then treat with things that create healthy flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and returns bent as before, know that you have not gone all the way.
If it is uncovered and wants to stay bent as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place.
And if he is thus healed, it is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it. if there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature;
And if there is a small bone that has rotted, and you can extract it with pliers, then extract it with a suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none behind;
And if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, then cut through both the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, place something on the wound that prevents rotting, and leave it until the flesh around the bones has rotted away, and then they will come out more easily.
And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then leave just the corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part of corruption, and it comes up to the flesh of the bone; then it must be cut and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help with your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, until the substances came to the leg, and it became swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open it.
but the mire by their foolishness worked so much that the abscesses opened, and they rotted much matter, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all lay raw and moist of the body.
and many mire they put care to II years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I came to them, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were curing him, and what rotted through the pus to great extent. and it became red the body of the youth, and had a color of citron.
I placed a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that some came towards each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened therefore, and cauterized in one of the pus until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inside bone.
I was the one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, except for the one that I removed;
and I began to restore the wound with medicinal sodas for a long time, and it could not heal;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I took it out, and I was sorry to sew the place together; but I could not more than I sewed around a palm of the bone, and it was brought to its full form, then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and sewed together quickly, and it did not need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and because of the fear of death that I had of him. For because of the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed entirely, and in the place of the bone grew hard cartilage, and was of good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary from all things, neither to go nor to come.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: Take a linen cloth, and tighten it to the head of the bone that is open, and command whoever holds it to extend it upward; And put another linen cloth larger than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, extending the head upwards, so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to see, so that the sinew does not cover the flesh;
And put a splint or a board under the bone to make the corrupted flesh covered.
And it must be done as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be done again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely.
then put I tinder underneath, and then silk from one part to the other the corruption, and be the silken thread long as the length of the corruption as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the corrupt joint, and silk the bone where it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, so there is nothing else than to cut it;
and if the corruption is where the finger of the hand, or where the finger of the foot, so it is very strong that thing, but nonetheless you must inquire about that corruption, how it opens to you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not make contrary;
and know that the incisors and silks to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of each, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so think about the instrument which you have need for according to what is fitting.
The shoulder can be dislocated either from within or from without;
and when you have medicated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes by this either from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the lack of the limb;
and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes that corruption of the limb from limb, and takes over the whole body;
If you hasten to cover it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the arm, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come until the hand.
And if it comes until the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then cover it with the knife.
And if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no use for remedies other than the quantity of its power.
And thus do all this when the corrosion comes or bites; If it comes in the first joint, then cover it after the other joint.
And if it comes or bites, then cover the whole bite. and if it goes up the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;
and the way to cut or saw the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on the lower lien, and others ministers the other lien above, and you sever the flesh which is between the two liens at the spathume width, until the bone is uncovered;
then cut or saw, and put on each side the drapery of linen so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess caused.
And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the place heavily, or put on some powders restraining;
Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that it happened to the man in his foot:
He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his heel of the foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot;
And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healed;
And long afterward the corrosion returned to his heel of the hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things that were applied after the purification of the body, and it could not cease the corrosion;
and it is said that I should bind his hand, and I do not want, unless I have hope of returning the matter. and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the virtue of the man was weak;
and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hastened to bind his hand, and became healthy.
and I do not recount this tale for any other reason than that one should do otherwise if one has need of it.
Sometimes an abscess comes in its fleshy place and remains so long that it makes a great assembly of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and out jumps the pus, and remains its vessel, just like a vial. and the skin that is on top is as subtle as a fine linen cloth, and does not reach down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy', and is not called 'fistula';
but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone and makes a hole, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure for this is that you cover that skin all around, and also when it is thin, like a cloth; and do not let it be exposed to its corruption.
And if you have a suspicion that the skin is exposed, and the corruption is not in full depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus with a clyster:
look if the breast is large, and the bow that surrounds it smells foul, then administer a clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: Take equal parts of resin, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
And then take of these according to your need, and make it in vinegar and honey, and in suppositories the breast, and restrain the opening. And let the medicine stay in for II hours, then withdraw it by squeezing.
Do this many times, until the breasts are calmed, and the pain is removed.
And no time is it a suppository of water from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top, then let it drain, and in the suppository, as long as you know that the breast is well calmed.
And if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water from ashes, then the suppository of water and honey or where there is a bit of litharge ground. or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey may have the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the flesh air.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the intestines is well purified, then cleanse it with that which causes flesh to be born in it, and that you take a plaster diaphinit, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the intestine is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, as long as it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and leave only as much room as the enema can enter, and if the opening that spits out blood is above, then cut or more lower where it is.
And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then arrange it in such a manner that the bowel goes to its lowest point, for when the bowel is in place, do not let flesh encroach, and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, arrange it in such a way: that the bowel runs gently downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel;
that the bowel runs gently downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast, and be above the linen sheet that covers the entire breast; then cover as forcefully in the place of the opening of the breast a little larger than the first, then be ointment on top of the other sheet according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the opening of the breast to align the bowel, and do not remove the large sheet outside except after many days once;
and he who is on the chest through the lung, bone often to remove the bowel, and knows those that run from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible.
and take guard if the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been in this manner extended and you see the nature that leaps on the lung through the chest, then know that the breasts are already healed, and approach the saints.
and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons are cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are men whose healing of flesh in their wounds is slow, and some who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowel leaps from the chest after many days, know that the breasts are not healed.
and if the breasts are slow to heal and are swollen, apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diaphinit, because it has a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine.
take the ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the aroma of old wine equal in substance;
then boil it and use it;
and the same way make honey boiled and mixed in, when the ointment diafinit is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is off the fire;
and then put it in a cloth and place it on the breast, and at no time is administered one aristeloge long, and roots of lily celestial, which is also as flour of rice and hundred-flower; and in the use of simples or composites: grind them and make powder, and put on the honey I have said, and use it;
and if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption has gone deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or in hard members, or limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panaritium is an abscess that arises below the fingernail of the hand, or foot, or by chance may arise in other places;
and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then the abscess comes, and rots and breaks open so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance corrodes the whole nail;
And comes the corrosion to the bone, as long as there comes pungent pain, and the head is of the two large, and the color is pale.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cut away all the superfluity that is remaining from the wound, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
And if the nail presses against the flesh and begins to prick, and bleed, it is necessary that you put a little cloth under the nail that does not touch the flesh, and push it upwards, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines hot and corrosive in order to remove everything; Then cure with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat further, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the joint is corrupted, cut it with the knife as it has been said before, then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is broken and bruised, and the patient feels great pain, then you must heal it first;
then cut the joint with the sharp spade by cutting across from above, and guard that the cut does not reach to the flesh which is below the joint, because the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in any of us of the two.
Those who are born with no bone in the joint do not move, and those who are born with a joint in the bone may sometimes move;
The waist of a fleshy person is light, in such manner: the waist at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if you hold it to cut.
In the one who is born or must be at the last our, it is fitting that you cut first the flesh roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable line for it, then cure it until it is healed.
The seizures that come to the two joints come by birth, or by wound welding, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary that you cut that suture so that the limbs repay according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not fuse together; or you put between two pieces of fine lead until the joints are fused, as is necessary.
If a seizure comes upon one of his two hands with the palm, so seize that seizure as it befits.
Veins are large vessels wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, that come into many members of the body;
and they happen more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Therefore it is necessary for you to administer once purge of oil, and then heal with the basilica.
The cure of iron is according to II manners: one is that one cuts them and draws out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
The cutting is done in this manner: First, raise the leg in hot water very strongly, until the thick veins are softened, then restrain the leg of the sick person from above the hip to the part below the knee.
Then cut the vein in I place, or in II or in III, with a wide incision, then  draw out and draw all of the black blood by hand from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the sick person can endure.
and then bind it, and command him to stay on meats avoiding black coal;
And recommence the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harms the patient.
The raising of the limb is according to this manner: Rub the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
And if you have no bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cut the spot on the vein of the long in the knee joint, or below in the part of the ankle;
then work the skin with the awl, and peel the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it;
And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord;
then push the point below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then you put it on the awl lightly, then cut it in the other place above 3 fingers.
then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, as you have done, and place it on another needle, as you have done first.
then cut another piece, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut it at the double point of the foot, then treat and lift it until the second piece.
then extract it piece by piece, until it is all drawn out, then cut it.
and if you cannot draw it and lift it, then put a needle into the whole strong thread double, and tie it and pull it, and put it below the root, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out. and keep that it does not cut, because if it cuts, then one cannot draw it nor lift it, and it comes to annoyance for the patient.
and when you have treated it completely, place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and tend to it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enveloped all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crosswise, but do not completely cover it; and treat it as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron used to cut the vein should be curved and not straight so that it does not cut into the vein;
and is of a large curve because if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that has no moisture;
and by chance it is born elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body serpents and worms, nestled between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its color, and the vein begins to swell out as much as the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two finger widths, and knot it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time there is a point at the outside, wrap around the plank, and knot it.
and if it is too long, so you cut a part of it, and wrap around the remaining, and do not cut it at its root, as long as it is all out. because if you cut it, so it goes back into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and rot there, and bad illness.
Therefore for that reason it is necessary that it be treated piece by piece until the head, and nothing remain in the body.
And sometimes this vein when it is treated with V palms of long, or X, and one man came to me once whose it was X palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out I rays or porous, and it pierces until the bottom, so that all flows through;
And be emptied of the matter which is within, and administer at the place medicines preventing rot any day, then cure it as the abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein main veins, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes out much of porous, and from which it leaps out.
Cure therefore as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land “disease of the ox,” because it happens many times to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body up and down, and one feels it well at the edge of limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps out;
and is caused by the rotting of some humors, such as come to worms and rubbish and roundworms in the belly
and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it cured and milked, one cannot flee except when it goes:
so it behooves you to tie the place above and below with a strong linen tightly, then cut on top and milk it forth, and if it goes into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain under it the eyebrow form, then cut above, and the wound treat.
And it is necessary to use the patient with purification of body and medicines solvent for the ill humors corrupted, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called in our land "vakir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I see what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and I poked after, and I saw it rise as a worm to the shoulder, faster than any thing, like living silver when it cuts from its place to another;
The pain departs from that place and goes into the shoulder, and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm.
Then she told me that it returned again around her body, as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner. However, I wanted to move the pain from that place to another, but I didn't want it to happen, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and for that reason appeared that constricted windiness.
and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins covered.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then place the hand on top and below gently, and then cup over until that constricted windiness in its place is gone. and cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those who drive out wind, such as foul pills and  seraphim pills, and similar others.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and soldered; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces;
and those which fall in any member if they fall according to two manners: or in principal member such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you hereafter, appear to you: Then it is necessary that you guard yourself against the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the syphax which is above the brain, is when there is scotomia and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps it is without being stuck in the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound moist white like to poultices, and jumps also as if burned flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, so hold from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside.
The sign of the arrow when it lies in the chest, are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were lodged in a hard thing, not hollow. and by chance the arrow moves as if it were the finger, and a dark blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. Therefore know without doubt that death ensues.
And the sign of the arrow that pierces low is that without plains of foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs. and throws great pain and great suffering and sighing; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls or stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound any thing of undigested meat.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and there is no point of sinew by the intestine rout, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and thighs and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you do something else.
It happened to a man with an arrow which fell into the root of his nose: I tried it, and I drew it from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and it was cured without feeling at all.
And I drew it with a tool an arrow that fell in the fat of the eye beneath the paper and beneath, and the arrow was renewed, and I could not reach more than the tip toward the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkic bow, to all the iron light without ears;
The wound was healed, and he did not have any bad accidents.
And treat an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I removed the barbs, and skillfully extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian was healed.
And treat an arrow to the man, that he had in his belly, and thought he would die;
and then after XXX days, he did not improve his condition; I cut above the arrow, and I gripped it, and extracted it fully, and there was no bad accident.
And if this man who had an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound was closed above;
and remained the arrow inside him, and did not change his natural conditions, nor felt annoyance in any of his natural works.
And behold another man, to whom an arrow struck his face, and his wound was closed. and he remained thus enduring great pain;
and many other similar things.
And there happened an arrow to the prince's man,  the king, who was lodged in his neck, and was slightly declining toward the right side; and the arrow was wholly embedded.
I was called to the cure after it had been lodged for three days. If I found the wound very narrow.
I sought it with a very subtle probe, and did not feel it at all; and there was a feeling of prickling and pain below his right ear.
I thought that it was from the point of the arrow. I placed upon its place a plaster atractive and digestive, for that the place did not swell; and appeared to me the wounds of the arrow.
and appeared to me the wounds of the arrow. I put the plaster on that day, and sutured the wound directly, and kept the patient there for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his flesh.
and he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for several days until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened in place;
then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it took four months to penetrate well, and then I widened the wound so that I put in pliers, and grasped it on both sides, and it couldn't issue;
then I did not cease to devise and engineer ways of instruments, until I took the day with pliers well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I drew it out, and restored the wound.
And the wise judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you apply your cure to those things which I do not say, because the books cannot contain everything.
But the wise masters compare with very little things, and on those which are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the advancement of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that the arrows are not from the members where they are fixed further than according to two manners: either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which is further by where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and never being pulled out at all now.
And if it does not move now, let it stay until the pain is gone, and let the wound be cleaned.
And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot move, let it stay so for some days, and move it each day.
And then if it moves, and if it does not move, pierce around the entire forest subtly, until the area around is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body and if one cannot see it, then cover the whole wound. and if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot by the widening of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins, then widen it as much as the wound is large;
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its base where it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck from both sides to as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can so that you can extract it.
and be careful that you do not break the arrow, but that you extract it more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then leave it until the surrounding tissue is softened, then treat it, for extraction is easier. And if the flow of blood is against you, then administer what we have said about its treatment in our chapter;
and guard yourself from the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put as much care as you can to extract the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
and put the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow hit him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, then put him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where one sees or feels nothing clearly, or the skin is swollen in that place:
Then cut there, as much as the pincers can grasp, and then extract it: If it leaps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then drive it.
And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, pull out the whole shaft:
And if the shaft has broken, and you see to administer medicine, then administer the instrument that is shaped like a hook so that the point of the arrow goes into the curve of the instrument;
and then pull it out, and if the arrow is broken, insert the instrument with its tip entering in to aid in extraction.
And if the wound is surrounded, it behooves you to cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it is fitting.
And if the arrow falls or in the belly or to the bladder or to the ribs, and it is close, and you can cover above, then hit it;
And guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if need be; And the care until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an owl, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways of this: Large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The form of the blunt point is like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the arrow, as here it is the form.
Of veins from which one is healed there are XXXI, so it has or head XVI, that is to say: Two bats that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbesch"; And the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; And two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is removed from the forehead and the vein that is on the head near the nose; and the two veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augueherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins in which one commonly bleeds are  V in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and is on the inner side of the left arm, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the vein is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is located on the right side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the fossa, and it is the one that is used to draw blood, which opens clearly on the pouch.
And the cephalic vein is the one that is between the thumb and the little finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is under the bend of the pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "femoral", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and on the other leg there are III veins below those
The bloodletting of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and migraines;
and the quality of the bloodletting, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a rope, until the II veins appear behind the ears in their two dependencies of the head: which then to your back, and where you feel the pulse below your back, so seize with your hand;
then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand to all the vein above, and cut through both the skin and the vein well two fingers deep, and make blood flow as much as you see;
then restrain and bind, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, and for sore eyes, and for habitual eye pain,
and the qualities of the drainage are as I said: and that the patient strains his neck until the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below his shoulder, and then signs of  it.
Then gently raise the vein towards your right index finger, and insert the lance below it, and lift the vein upwards, and make the cut, just as you did with the other two veins, and draw out blood according to your need.
Then untie the patient, and place your right hand over the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top; and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed;
And we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments, and for migraine, and for redness;
And its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; Then take the instrument which is called “digger”, whose form is here:
And place the point on the vein, and steady it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then tie the patient's neck, and tie the vein as long as it is saned and never work with a wide flame.
However, it does not suit that the flames are too large; and the saining is across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle.
Staining of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps with the eyes, and the nose, and the throat, and at the root of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
And the qualities of their staining are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with some lien, as before;
Then heal it, and let the healing be through a traverse, a prick of the long flame a little wide, for there is no flesh there. And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks.
Then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cloth, and tie it well.
The healing of the vein in the nose is good for a runny nose, and for sore throats, and for face ailments like migraine and redness that comes to the face, and even when it is old.
And the qualities of the healing are that the patient tightens their collar, then strains their nose with their left hand, and takes a subtle long flame, and inserts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in there, and the blood will now begin to correct.
and do not let them move too much, and make a correction of the blood according to your need, then tie it for one night, because it is very quickly restored;
The veins of the two shoulders help in the treatment of lameness, and in the beginning of rheumatism, and many illnesses, and epilepsy, and corrosions, and herpes, and tumors;
and the qualities of the vein are that the patient strains their neck underneath both, as we have said;
and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on a stool, then prick the vein of the long one a little widely, then draw blood moderately, or as much as is needed;
then do the other side in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and restrain both veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and let him rest until morning so that the wound is healed.
of the vein of the leaves The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and wounds of the gums and tongue.
And the qualities of the healing are to make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins.
Therefore, cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and in the same way with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
of the vein below the tongue The healing of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the cephalic bleeding, and it is at the stricture of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth.
and the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look below on each side a black vein:
then prick both, and do not go too deep in, for beneath them are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly pricked are pricked according to two manners:
or they prick at all the flame of the middle wide, or olive subtle as you cut trenches, and is called 'anesil'; and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and thinness of the veins. The form of the flame is very well known, and is wide as you see.
And it is necessary for opening the veins with flowing blood that appear large and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive trench:
and is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the veins subtly, where there is subtly yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that are under the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen.
And it is proper for the one who performs surgery that he operates skillfully, and that he avoids the artery which is below (it). And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and should not be pricking the flame, but cutting as one would with a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you restrain it, and change another; or you want no vein of it, or you operate in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and with the flame cauterize, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the wound, then it is fitting that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the place as much as you know the pulse. then mark the place with ink, and then tie up the arm, and cauterize the vein with the flame as we have said. and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery. Therefore avoid it.
And if you see it surge upward as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery. Hasten then, and put your hand on its length, then remove your hand if the blood ceases, which happens many times. He raises his arm, and leaves it so, and does not move it the patient.
And be without fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not clean and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then close the artery if it opens, because the head of the vein. and cleanse the wound.
And take a rind of fig, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well until the next day.
If the blade is unstained, this is good; If not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stain blood.
And the stains should not be grazed in more locations due to the small size of the wound and the position of the arm's ligament.
The vein's blood in the middle helps because it treats blood from above and below, due to its composition of basilary and cephalic veins as we have said;
And it is important for the patient to lie with their leg toward the nerve that is below, and if they are not too far apart, he finds the nerve and it swells and the healthy parts are grazed, and by chance it cannot heal.
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must feel for it with the instrument; and escape the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because this is the safest of all veins, because it has neither a nerve nor an artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and do not worry if one must do it the first time, and one begins again; and by chance it swells the eyes for some men, even if one does it the first time, but it does not harm them.
The quality of blood is according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that it is administered only to maintain health, and to expel future diseases;
and may the bloodletting be done in one of the III veins which are or count: That is to say, cephalic, fasted, and basilica. and one must bleed at the beginning of prayers in the morning, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one must bleed the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Blood letting administered to the sick has no set time, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in all times;
and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Those over sixty years old should not bleed.
And when some want to be bled, in whatever manner, it is fitting that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluities from the intestines harmful to the principal members;
nor does he heal well who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as it lasts, nor the dropsy.
and if it worsens after pain in the gut, vomiting and rumbling of the belly, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, of watching and fasting, and that which weakens virtue, whether by weapon or by body;
then purge the humors, if it is swollen, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then bathe him, if nothing hinders, to purge the blood, and heal the vein around the third (of the body), as we have said.
and keep him from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things.
and be healthy and joyful, and let the one who is healing be higher than the one who heals him, and rub his arm two or three times, then restrain the bandage on the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the swelling.
and then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them;
then moisten the veins with a drop of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein below its place one fingerbreadth where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not burst and be injured by the iron.
For there are veins that bulge like cords when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the lancet on them, they retract from the lancet, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these. and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so that those who bleed should be wise in these things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it's good. If not, if it begins again a little under that place or above gently, if the joints are not swollen
And if the joints are swollen, and the patient is in distress, let him leave it for a day or two, and do not tie up his arm: for perhaps abscesses will come to appear.
Do not enter into a bath, then resume the treatment if he wishes;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then pierce into that opening itself throughout its entire length straightly;
and work a little gently, so that the joints become swollen; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, then do not resume the treatment, and put on a little bit of oil from olive, because it heals the body from blood, and is effective in this place, the grease that comes from the olive;
And thus administer the linseed in each vein that you bleed them, to stop the flow of blood.
And this same thing is applied and bandaged when it is put back in place; so subtly the bandage and spread when it is too large.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is only bled once and the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and some oil a little hot, and restrain it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding of the vein, and if it remains in place for some days afterwards without any blackness or greenness, it does no harm. And if you see it, put on top nothing of aloe or frankincense remixed in the juice of calamine,  or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance to the basilica's healthy:
Place your hand then upon it, and if you find the place soft under pressure of the hand, so is that appearance bad. Therefore eschew that you put upon it nothing of what we have said, because by chance it may close without the artery.
But let him cover with dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each wound with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if it is black, let it be left so until it is red; And if you see it large, let it be left until it becomes thinner. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for him who is lean and frail, and needs the extraction of blood, one should make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide;
And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it befits him to bleed often, and he must be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is saved from the diminution of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is worth more than bleeding from the long or wide.
And for him whose body needs bloodletting, it befits to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; If he is hot, treat him with bloodletting three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, before the bloodletting, give him moistened bread in muzzy syrup, or in honey aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if it pulses at the vein, after the outflow of much blood, it is necessary that he moisten broth of flesh, and fragrant syrup, subtle, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he wishes to empty his arm, and bleed another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And he who wants to drain his arm after the first vein opening, and he has strong flesh, then heals VII hours after the first vein opening, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to bleed from another side, they must bleed the second day or the third.
For he has much blood within the body that is already hot, and brings on fever; if it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it falls in pieces. since you treat all the conditions of its health, and put your hand on his pulse when it is healthy, that death may not come in place of pieces, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent.
and it does not become when you see a dislocated arm, and make blood flow the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press hard on it. but if it is crooked, he should extend his arm as much as possible, because that would be bad;
but let it remain until it heals the second time. or you will prick it with the tip of the flame, until the blood that was frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on the piece of felt laid in sharp, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity is to bleed a second time, then in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein of the arm is bled at the place of the vein of the head because it is composed there.
And the manner of the healing is that the patient puts his hand into hot water until the bone is red.
Then it is bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then the healing now through the middle, neither wide nor long.
And let the opening be wide, and be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot move out, put the hand back into hot water, and leave to draw the blood in the water until you have enough.
And if it is in summer, then do not put the hand back into hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer.
And the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no artery nor nerve.
The healing of the vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it. And if it heals crookedly, and if you cut it completely through, then it will not cause harm;
And do not move it too much, for the nerves are all uncovered from flesh, and then put the hand in warm water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot issue out.
And when you will have treated of the blood as much as is necessary, then put on the vein oil and wool to soothe it well, and thus do for each vein.
The vein of it in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you for the right.
The blood of the sophene is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as diseases of the knees, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and legs ancients, and similar illnesses.
And the qualities of its blood are such that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it perspires, and ties above the joint of the foot. And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
Blood therefore flows through the larger vein, or at the ankle, where it merits more.
And if you bleed on the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are beneath, and the bleeding should traverse as when cutting.
And let the flames be applied.
And if the vein cannot be drawn out, then put your foot into the water, and let the vein flow well.
And if the bleeding is necessary the first time, it is recommenced the second time above a bit, because the place is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do of the same sort from the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic is at the ankle of fury, and its pain reaches to the pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
And the qualities of his vein are that the patient enters into or bath, and withdraws above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise he does not open the vein.
And if it opens, so draw the blood in all the ways that you can, and across. And it is better that you cut it, because the vein is dry, and it is much replenished in men's hands.
And it is better that you cut it, because the vein is dry, and it is much replenished in men's hands. And if you do not find it, so draw blood from any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves.
And do so much blood drawing as you see fit, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and restrain it. She is now healed.
Suctions are made of horns, or leather, or glass;
and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction which is without pricking is done in two ways: either with all fire, or without fire;
and suction that is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places on the body, so one is entirely at the top of the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others on the two ribs of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on both shoulders; and the suction cup on the hips and the suction cups remove them from the arms and the suction cups from the two legs; and the suction cups from the two ankles;
and the suction doesn't treat blood, but only small veins that are spread throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken one as much as bleeding from a vein; and it is not proper that it be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, as long as the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to suction, or for customs, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and remove and in every instance;
because there are some who, when they need to suction, have a heavy head;
and if to those who have swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed from it; and if there are those who dream, and see through blood and dizziness and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed from the month, we command to ventilate after three hours of the day.
The vein of the temple helps with the great pain in the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not proper for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventosaion is in the place of the vein of the cephalic, and it is not proper for those who are of cold constitution to use it, or who have a catarrh, because this does great harm to them;
and for those it is not proper that the elderly use it, nor who have or cold diseases of the head.
And those who recover from it, often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower down because of the fear of obliviousness.
The cauterization of the neck is in the place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and for that reason it is good for the treatment of the hip, and for cutting open the channel of the groin, and for all ailments, and for suppuration.
and it is proper not to put pressure too hard on it, because if it is held too firmly it can cause blockage in the stomach or heart.
The cauterization of the two ribs of the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia, and migraine, and to relieve strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica.
And it is proper that you command the person being treated to press their hand on the spot so they don't cut the artery and bleed excessively.
The cauterization below the chin is good for mouth ailments, and gum disease, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. and is in the place of the II lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness coming from heat and fullness.
The bleeding of the veins with the knife is as good as three arm veins because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the patient not to bleed too much with it because the vein is bare of flesh and knows only nerves and arteries.
The leech that is on the rump is worth as much as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases underneath, and it must be that the leech is large, and be of iron, so that it has the need to well suck. and perhaps, if it were thin, it would break; and it makes large wounds.
The leeches on the legs are applied openly because they draw blood from the whole body, and are worth old pains of the reins, and of the bowels, and of the bladder, and soften tumors;
and are located in the place of the two hip joints, and the two ankles, and nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring about pain in many positions.
The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and successively, and put it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the redness of blood.
then put it on fire, and replace the suction cups, and take heed to the arrangement of the bodies, because there are some who have tender flesh, and clear pores. so it is fitting to wound once only, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep hole. and suck lightly.
And if the abscess is large, it is fitting to wound twice: the first time to subtly open the vein of blood thick
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike the third time;
and when we want to drain blood little by little, then we prick only once. And if we want much blood, we begin again often;
and if the vein is thick, strike it deep, and the end is that the hairs be pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for him who has thick and hard skin, and who has open pores, that you apply to their place the leeches of oil aperitif and dissolving: if it is in this case, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of the oil of cucurbit seed;
and if it is in winter, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take oil of wormwood, or of balsam, or oil of rue, and similar.
And if the one who is being healed has tender skin and large pores, one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, if he rises from it, or from myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities raise them with old wine, or with their own water, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
And it is not suitable to draw blood with a cupping glass before bathing nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours.
And he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he get up when he needs to be cupped, and when he has been cupped.
And beware those who are being treated, who are choleric, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed; If it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and chicory and lettuce at the meal, and similar things; and minced pigeons, and goat meat, and moist meats.
and minced pigeons, and goat meat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrup of honey, and scented wine, which is between old and new, and millet, and pearl barley, and small sparrows, and pigeons.
And on the day that he will become feverish, he must drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give no man at any time triacle or musket before the fever, or after, in order to comfort the main limbs; And be subtle with the sweat, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The cupping glasses that are put without hurting are those that are put upon the liver and the stomach and gout, and upon the belly and the breast and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their own, and it is done only in order to draw blood from member to member, just as we put them on the nipples when milk comes in.
In order to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we put cupping glasses on the belly and breast to reduce the size of the member.
and bone pain, when there is an ulcer or stone, so that by its virtue it attracts the ulcer, or displaces the stone from its place.
and thus it is done when one puts it upon the liver and upon the stomach when there is wind held back, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water, such as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water where herbs suitable for it have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And it should be two palms wide and half a palm in length, and have a small hole on the side towards the middle, as if to insert a needle, and be of iron, so that it does not turn cold before putting it upon the member;
And in the middle place a rod of across from iron or rain, to put a candle in it gripped, and be they great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
For the leeches of children are other than the old, and the thin ones than the fat ones.
And thus one must put this leech upon the limb.
Taking the candle of wax or linen, and putting it within the leech across from the rod which is within the leech, so that the light be at the bottom of the leech so it does not burn the patient;
And then put it upon the limb, and these must be upon the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, so it goes the vapor, and one removes the leech;
And take again the linen as before, and begin it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup therefore which is administered in the illness of pleuresin, to all acute, it has no stalk nor perforation, and is not administered further than when it is full of water, and is placed upon the member only so much.
and this is its form:
Suction cups are not administered further than in members where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar ones; and in their wounds of flesh, such as two or nails, and other similar things;
And the qualities of the user are that when you find suction cups that are in clear sweet waters without perforation, take them.
and put them one by one in sweet water, until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their bellies; And then let it be cleansed by vein-letting and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on a poultice;
And when they are smooth, and fall, if it is their place where one can put cupping, then put it, because it does much good after.
If that is not the case, raise the place with a light hand, and then water, very well, and then sprain it.
And if the place heals too much after the poultice, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the swelling subsides.
And if the swelling is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol or gall and similar things, until it subsides.
Or put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them stay there until they dry out on the place, then it will stop now.
and if you need more of them, take other bandages.
And if the bandages do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or you insert a needle there until the bandage comes out, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden.
and when you see that they are sticking, sprinkle a little bit of aloe and flaxseed powder on top, or ash, they will now stick.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear child, that the fools who rely on this chapter will never see any of the ancient books, nor read any letters from them.
and for this reason the science is being lost in our land, because I never found any good ones
and I know nothing about it, except through the science of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It therefore behooves us to say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the sages place their understanding, and remain on the truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to cure the patient on one side and the other, if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if the tension is not very well, or too cold;
and avoid cold things, that is to say cold meats, and meat of deer and goat, and do not drink wine, and do not eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, as long as you have a doubt of hot abscess or expansion of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to his first governance which he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and entrails of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with such twisting they are renewed and more quickly healed fractures.
And know that the bones broken of the old and decrepit do not well rejoin nor solder according to their nature for the dryness of the members, nor those also which are too tender, as bones of little children;
but never mind, instruct upon the broken bone, the big tendons which hold it together and join the limb together, as long as it enforces itself as it was before; and for this reason, you must feed him with thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or of the arm, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go to a point, and others when sharpening, like the nib of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go to a point, and others when sharpening, like the nib of a pen for writing. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture to a whole small fissure.
And to every manner has his engine, and his instrument proper in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place.
and is known the fracture of the bone by those that the place is twisted, and opens well outwardly, and  is felt at the pressure of the hand.
and when there is no torsion nor son at the touching, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture.
but it can well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture. If it does not suit that you move it by hand, but put upon medicines which come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and the two parts are disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that an abscess may come at the wound;
and if an abscess comes at the wound, then you leave it alone for no day, until the abscess is quieted.
then put it together carefully and skillfully as you can, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that one where there are pieces.
Then restrain it, as it is fitting here afterward.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and they are two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or in your hand if it is one small limb, or two cords, or to one cord and to your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move them by all means to their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well.
if you straighten it well, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who cause it to come from their work abscess hot and contraction in the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor by turning, nor in any other way. and take good care that the limb is so assured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it should be put in such a disposition that it does not feel any pain.
and take good care that the limb is so assured that it does not feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it should be put in such a disposition that it does not feel any pain. and take care that it is placed straightly, that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in size and in shape.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to wrap bandages of soft and fine linen; and those which are large, such as hips and thighs:
so it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and stiff linen, because the broad linens embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap;
Then bind it with light splints, III turns or IV according to the limb, and restrain your hand a bit on all the length, then go above the break and restrain it less, that the break then move away a bit.
And soften the splint little by little, until you feel most of the healthy part, then take the other splint, and turn it back right above the broken place;
Then go down to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first place above;
Then put between the splints padding of linen or cloth, until it is all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on a soothing poultice for the abscess, which takes away the swelling, and leave it so for some days.
Then strain a piece of the  half of a good length of chain, or of a staff from which they make the cloaks, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure.
But it is necessary that the piece which one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and broader than the others;
and let it also be as long as is needed to the limb of small or large size; Then strain on the pieces as you did in the first binding, then bind above with a thread evenly, just as in the first binding above the fracture. more tight is it above, less;
and it is necessary that the thread be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their stitches with cords of twisted linen, and that is a great error, for the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not right that there be less than two fingers' width between each stitch.
And if the patient is wounded by the bones of the shoulders after the strapping in their healthy parts, then put under them compresses of linen or wool felt so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the bones are broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it is not proper to tightly bind all broken limbs on the first day. For when the member is large, it is not right to put stitches further than after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of abscesses appearing hot.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
and it is that you take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, and you mix it with plenty of egg, and put this concoction, neither too light nor too thick, on top, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fracture in many cases, even for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another way of a plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: Take one part bardos bark and  celandine and wormwood and asafoetida and arabic gum and  mugwort, each ten parts; myrrh and aloes, each five parts; and alechyl nine parts. And make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, so use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is worth to many men.
Another way of plaster that is worth for torsion: Take mugwort and wormwood, each ten parts; myrrh and aloes, each nine parts; and acai six parts. Boil Armenian X, grind it well, and confection with water or yolk of egg, and administer.
Another way to treat joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that arises, and the use of bone, and the fracture: Take new linen, and moisten it in broth and oil, and put it on the place.
This plaster does not restore [the body], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly takes away the pains.
Another way to treat that restores broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, and earthworm leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of emplaster for the restoration of the broken bone and to lessen the remaining of the abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of chickpeas, one part each;
and grind, and confection with wine, and if the limb is sun-scorched, confection it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way to set a bone more firmly than the first, when an abscess prevents the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and seeds of flax,  balm, melilot, and saffron, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part. and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should put on the broken limb a restorative made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of plaistering that is good for the wound and pain: Take moth and chaffinch feathers or owl feathers, wormwood, and flax, all equally, grind them together, make a plaster and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place. if not loosen it by hand again for several days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching,  lack of rest, or swelling, then hasten and loosen it, and remove the plaster at once.
And take a light cloth, and a sponge of wet sea, and dip it in water, and lift the spot up, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of hot suppuration.
And rest the inflammation of the limb, and the pain is gone, then begin again the subtle poultice, and a little bit of plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and continue until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess has pus and redness and pain and swelling are all there, and you need to apply poultice and linen, if it begins again, just as you did at the first doing.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not unbind it for three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture sets, and approaches the alignment of the bone above;
then restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before;
and if you see it drying more than is necessary, know that numbness cannot come there; apply then a warm water bath, every time you loosen it, and that be each third day, and slightly remove the dressing;
by this work therefore comes numbness to the limb, and corrects hastily those who foolishly make it stiff again;
it is bad, and this work is dangerous, and I see no other thing than to leave it and work it straight.
Many ways of fractures are, and various figures, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone every bone up to the side which is below the bone, as it is made high or low; And for this reason, this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute";
And the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is impacted percussion, or fissure or of neck of stone, or of heel upon stone, or other similar things.
And if it has a fracture piercing, which approaches up to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound that is rejoined in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason, this fracture is called "capillary";
And if the wound that is made either by hitting with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone inwards, and is the  place like those who make the braziers when they heat on the cauldrons; if between the stones within
And this happens more to those who have or whose head is moist bones, like that of a child;
and happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are separated from them like stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by pulling on them, and the questioning with probes, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
The appearance of the hair capillary is known by this that when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed above it, the black fracture opens.
In the cure of a fracture, take care of accidents in the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, and emission of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever with chills, and eyes red and bulging, and other similar things in more dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unavoidable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest that you can.
And if this is the case, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone does not rot, and the accident we have mentioned comes about.
And if the fracture of the bone comes as far as the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the fractured part thus:
and it is that you  press the head of the sick man down and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more gently than you can, and if a discharge of blood comes when uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then help them with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the pus sack is quieted, and be assured of blood clotting; then begin to remove the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work:
one way is that you cut at the narrow section in front, and this is the form:
And then he puts another piece larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and some of iron:
and in work lightly, so that you do not  break the head.
And if the bone is  hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with saws, not too deeply so that they do not go beyond the soft part of the bone, and it must have above the point a margin or circle that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone.
and you must have more than one, so that each comes in its place of the species of bone, so that you may have targets for all tests.
And this is the form of the three kinds of targets:
The qualities for perceiving around the broken bone are that you put one target on the bone, and turn at your two [joints] until you know that the bone is perceived.
then put the other target elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do these more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pliers;
and keep that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you reset the apparatus which is stayed from the bone to all other instruments seeming to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more strong and more subtle than the other incisor.
And if there remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then lightly lift the bones with the instruments; then cure the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and it works very well, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this lenticular incision, for this is the form:
And do not cut on one side, and let the part be acute in two costs, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then strike with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly strike the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is stuck to the bone, gently remove it, because one removes it well without pain, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to rere that asperity, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you must have various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If one shaves before with a large razor, and after with more subtle ones, and does not cease doing so until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breakage, it is fitting that you bring a cause according to its arrangement;
and this thing is not returned to anyone who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the flesh, then administer above the other linen, and do not restrain it more than so that it holds the wound only;
and let it so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of verveine, and powder of incense, and arnica, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer additional medicines mixed with no stinging.
and guard that the wound be always clean, that you do not leave any ointment, nor allow it to gather pus, because when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and pains, and brings great evils to the patient;
for when one puts on a biting thing such as this, it stings upward Take heed therefore, if no evil accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if the blackness does not come out except through the medicine that has been put on, because it has virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix one cloth with it, and put it on the sting. then treat it in ways of treatment as is fitting until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the kneecap break above or one only, because there are two bones.
and the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break except if it is bent or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your small finger or the opening of the kneecap, and place each fracture inside your index finger and to the pouch on the outside, until the kneecap returns according to its natural shape. And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the cheekbone and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even with the head of a stick a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do it again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess is calmed, then bind to the head with two tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind it on the other side, if the fracture is there. And let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of both.
And they said any restorative one must moisten the tents with butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the preparation of auburn of an egg and powder of mill. Then leave the tent until the bone is hard, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one puts or lays down goose feathers in place of tents, and if it's soft cloth draping around, and it holds the burn, and blows on the patient. Or do what you wish.
And if an abscess comes to the new while you work on it, put a cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in the pock of diaquillon.
And if an abscess comes, put a plaster on the outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put light compresses on top, and bind it not at all.
And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then you extract it with suitable instruments for that, then suture the opening, and treat it with appropriate things like flesh, and soldering, as well as plasters and ointments suitable for that.
And if it has no wound inside the bone, treat it with tents and put splints in them until it is healed.
When the jaw is dislocated down, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two, except that it is splintered inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient. and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, put your right index finger there, and gently push the fracture inward, and with the other hand hold it from outside, and make it even.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced into two, it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts, until they are equal.
And if movement of the teeth or a rupture occurs, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and then put a certificate on top of the broken jawbone, and put on a double cloth. And put on top of the cloth a large bandage well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it above as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed. And put a plaster on it, of powdered mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the pus.
And put a light linen plaster on top, and if the plasters are dry and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy. Many times is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together,  reward oneself, no piece of bone is removed. if subtlety you have instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, sew the wound, if it is wide, and put on its top bandages suitable to those, so that it may hinder flesh, until it be healed.
The collarbone breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways:
or she is broken and severed in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore.
where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is so when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the helper who feels the fractured force. and the other extends the neck towards the part.
then place the fracture equal to your two, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor defect.
And if you need to extend further, so place under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your need. and extend and lightly the force, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you place the fracture equal, as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the bone out by force because it comes embedded, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back and put below the shoulder the lower edge of the arm, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
And then address the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it fragmented, it is necessary that you cut above;
and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any raising, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but that you place under the forceps this instrument, to guard the eye.
and seems like a spoon, and is not too pointed, and be also as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
and have two cheeks, as you see, and be one wide, and the other narrower, as it is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of the hot abscess, so cover the wound, and if the break is small, or you doubt about hot abscess, then apply to the wound of cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses come there, moisten the cloth in rose oil and asel and wine, and put it on.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of albumen of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the saddle, if you need it; then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put it draped double over the poultices, and bandage them. then take a strip subtle of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and put the strip over the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder. and bandage each part, and when you see that the strip holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain them.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the arm. If you want to lighten the fracture of the shoulder by setting the shoulder, or tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, up to 20 days;
Then re-apply the splint, if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and leave him like this, until he is restored.
And it is restored in the most at 28 days, and in less to no one.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or its bone does not meet in the middle, and one cannot feel it except by touch.
So arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can.
Then put on its place powder of the mill with abundance of egg, and light dressings, and put on top a double cloth. Then put on top a broad and subtle strap, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the strap's edge is uneven anywhere on the shoulder, apply those bandages of linen so that the strap lies evenly.
And then restrain it with a whole great bandage firmly, so that the strap does not move from its place, and look at the linen each day.
And every time it softens, restrain it, and put the strap evenly if it is out of place, and make the patient lie on their side.
And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And when this number is accomplished, untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that is put out lightly.
And if a piece of the bone is exposed before and not under the heart, do it like this, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe an abscess hot.
of the fracture of the leg
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.
And when it is broken in the midst, it falls downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and cough, and perhaps vomiting blood, and opens the channels in the broken bone, and it feels warm to the touch.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of each rib with your hands, and carefully bring them together in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
then put plasters and bandages on top of the broken bone, a subtle salt poultice or some other light substance, and wrap it in cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it well, and reward every hour the linen, and if it becomes loose, tighten it.
and if it behooves to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and scrape the area, and dress those who have come from ways of care.
then reset the area, and restrain it as long as it is healed.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in those places after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only for those because they are brittle. and one feels it well upon inquiry as two.
And the restoration is that you put the fracture even, as it behoves. And then put on the splint, and restrain it with a strap if you need it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, the patient feels great pain and sharpness, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane. and along with pains, and coughs and vomits great spitting of blood, and this is of grievous health, and the ancients have put much remedy in it.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to drive the wind outward.
We do not make this, except that boils come when they haven't. And if it comes to him, heal it.
And they said any one of you put cupping glasses on the place, to suck them strongly, and it seems right. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness.
And they said of each one that one should cover the place with wool moistened in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the heat around it, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone which pierces the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath a instrument to guard the liver.
And then one must trench the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes, then put on a cloth moistened in rose oil, and put it on the place;
and treat while the place of those that it is necessary for an abscess, and lie still on their side where it should, until it is healed.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing.
Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if they move and feel well when being pulled and straightened, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care into it.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take note whether the feet are softened, and if the limbs that were affected are now in hand, and on the back there is airiness and involuntary evacuation;
and when one has laid it on its stomach, then there is involuntary evacuation. And when he is placed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if you do not labor in its treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is the lighter thing.
And the treatment is that you warm it if there is an abscess hot, so put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased;
Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover the wound. And remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and then treat it with ointment that helps to close the flesh, until it is healed.
And if the bone of the shoulder is broken, which is called "the bone of the cow," put your fist of your left hand into it and place it even with the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it.
Then restrain it, and if there are broken bones, do the same, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It happens sometimes that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it has happened, it should have been a little bit lessened at the top; and make it long and sloping towards the outside, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and tingling, and swells that which is broken.
And the restoration is that you stretch your hand above, as long as you are on the breakage; and know which one is the breakage and the form of it;
and if the breakage is only at the top, put straight that breakage, as long as it is in natural form.
And if the fracture is long or it bends inwards, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you. And when you would have put it straight, put above the plaster, then put above a splint of wood or of heartwood, and restrain the breakage, so that it does not move;
and place the part under the ribs, until the limb is equal. And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it, until the abscess is healed, and put on what we have said before. and then return to restoration, and restrain it as necessary, if there is no bad accident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways:
one of which is that you take a piece of smooth wood, according to this form:
And bind the two parts with two bindings, and raise them upward, and place the patient on a seat;
Then when the bone of his arm is broken above the armpit, and there is one curvature of stick, then he may lie on any heavy thing or let ministers stretch it down.
Then put the splints to his fracture even with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his head, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the two ministers that one holds those who are above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below all the limb, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, restrain the limb below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its side.
And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one splint under the armpit and the other towards the side, below the fracture.
And also if the fracture is towards the side, then it is necessary to put one splint lightly, without effort, until the fracture is even on the level, and on the side.
Then put the fracture even as it should be, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come.
And if abscess comes there, do not restrain it until VII days, and put on a half linen in oil and rose ointment, until the abscess comes to be appeased.
then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint on the break, then assemble the arm upon the assistant, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the breast.
and put the sheet, and restrain upon the assistant, and upon the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if no thing prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, then use splints, and put on the break a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint I do of space, and be each splint so great that it passes the break III does of each part.
Then restrain upon the bones, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the bruise, stronger and less in distancing.
And if you see the setting of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the heat abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then look every three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the dressings cannot come to the limb because it is too tight. If the address, as we have said.
And if none such accidents come, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands upon his stomach;
and put under the shoulder one cushion of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or night that the form of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the bonds;
If it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and he is given the food that we have put forth, in such a way that the food be at first subtle; And when it begins to recover, let it be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days from all; and then one must untie [it] and administer bath and medicines of ointments for the place to be addressed.
And if the constriction is ugly and impeded, it remains to untie for 1 day or II months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fossil," because one is small, and that is the one following the pouch;
and the other is large, and that is the one below, towards the small toe.
By chance broken the large fossil only, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing.
And when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grieved than when they are broken together.
If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and made equal.
And if it is the large bone, then it must be pulled harder;
and stretch it over the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other bones, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, that the patient may not suffer any labor;
then extend the ministers of his arm to the lower part towards his hand, or on the limb, and one other minister to the other above.
And then he puts the mirror even, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its place, and if any is detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do as we have said before on the bone.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; Take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses come out, then glue the covering of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the covering gently above, until the abscesses are calmed.
And then remove the cerate, and put the plaster of ground flour with plenty of egg white, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the crushing be a little more outwards, and one piece wider than the others;
and know that he must have VI arm or arms in more arrangements: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in II;
and restrain more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and be neither hard nor rough;
and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and be neither hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is restrained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water until the itching is appeased;
and let the limb not be left too tightly restrained.
And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if you take care that the nurse can't come to the limb because it is too swollen, then you must soften it a little, and leave it like this for some days until the swelling subsides, and then constrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind him until XX days.
Or when he is turning, then he places his hands on his neck, and let his neck be straight, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back.
And know that this sprain is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, according to the constitutions and complexities of the humors.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as well the palms many times have a few fractures, and there comes nothing but swelling many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed and be straight in front of him equally.
Then he puts his hand on the board extended, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and places them equal the eyes, until they are well joined.
And puts the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place. and be enveloped in a linen sheet.
And if the fracture is at the root near the belly of the plant, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken limb. and then fasten it with a long cloth, and let the poultice be as large as the hand of the limb, and bind it as is fitting.
And if the fracture is in the forearm, then you must place a splint on top and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and close the ligature between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the leg, if it is the tibia, set it straight as is fitting. and bind it with the limb, and if you see that it is set a little crooked to raise the fracture, and do not move it.
And if the fracture is in any of the other bones, such as the index finger or another, set it straight and tie it with the healthy limb that is next to it. or you bind them all together while he is laying down, or put it on a splint like our pouch
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot, dry abscess, and treat those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and one can see this well when it turns front and back;
and its restoration is done by tying the part above the break, and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his band to his side evenly;
and this is when the break is set in the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one ligament should be pulled towards the groin and the other ligaments below the fracture.
And also if it is close to the knee, then let the bands be near the knee, and the extension below;
Then put the eyes of the bone even with his two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and tie it, if abscess does not come there.
And if there is an abscess hot, let it heal then return to your work and your cure; The ligature is made in this manner.
It is necessary that you envelop on the bruise a doubled bandage hard in two or three, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread upwards;
then turn upwards on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the bruise splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then apply the place eight between the leg and the hip of drapes soft to put even the tightness, then commence to tie strongly three or four above the fracture; and when more goes up above the fracture, and less the restraint;
then understand as two joints of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and in tie three knots that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot;
and the restraint, so that it does not move from its place, then let him thus, then since there comes no abscess nor swelling nor other semblance. And if it happens, then untie it, and address what comes, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of the bone that prick, then it is necessary to cover them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place and draw out pus. And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh bone is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm;
However, with this restoration made, it does not harm the patient.
And know that the  hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of complexions.
Know that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is no longer but a fracture, or opening, and it happens to all wounds, without wound, and everyone feels this well.
And the restoration is this: set equal those things that are broken to their halves, as long as they can be assembled and moved together;
then put the splint on it, and put a round plaster over it if you need it, and restrain it as is necessary, then follow all the precautions that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things. and apply to each accident what is fitting for it, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, because one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile";
and there occurs all the fracture as it comes to the arm, and for that reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all similar. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the small bones are broken, turn it back.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns downwards.
Therefore administer extension, and put it straight, and tie the splints equally;
but nonetheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter. and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two fasces of felt that wrap the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to below.
Then wrap them in two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this juncture, the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is well.
And none administer one bears along the length of the leg, and if it is felt, and it put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly made these in the fracture or where there is a wound.
And move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or other accident; if it cures as long as it is sound.
of the breaking of bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot there is sometimes a fracture and at the two toes, and there have been very few in more dispositions.
And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones overlap each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot now on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their places;
Then put the splint and pads above it, and place under the belly of the foot a small board at the shoulder plain, then restrain it to the foot evenly, then that you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need.
And when III days or IIII will have passed, untie the linen, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand. Then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be a little wider, then put under the foot that board that I have said, and restrain it evenly.
And if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and restrain the board under the foot. And let it be standing on the top of the board above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said. And take care of each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of the woman's body is broken, make it sit wide open, then incline it to the back part, and be held behind.
Then fill the hollow of the patient's body with cotton, and put in as much as there is space for it.
Then untie the woman, and raise her back up and down, and then push the cotton inward until it reaches the entrance of the body, and return the bone with it.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so. If the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie to the wound a chain, and put all the bladder into the nature. then blow into the chain's opening, until the bladder is inflated inside: Then nature will return the fracture;
Then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for several days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the hand of a man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the hipbone;
And these fractures near are not concealed from him who puts his study and use to it, and understands my book.
For the fracture signifies in many positions the right way of restoration: Understand then.
In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the shaft. then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or until healed, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for someone who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that they be healed now, so that the dressings that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound is healing, then keep the vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
And if abscesses come there, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then you must put it back together lightly with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extension is not ready for you to put it straight with your hands, then reset it using this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight finger lengths long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this purpose the one who works it must dip it in three or four, according to what he needs in each case of a broken bone.
and it should be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and it should be wide in front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And is called "palainche", for which it is necessary that the shoulder head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and push it once, until it returns, and be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it behoves that you cut the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have purchase.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then with the edge of a suitable instrument, either an incision tool or saw, to your power;
then remove what is remaining in the bone of asperity and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
If you do so until it is in its place, then soak the bandage in dark, astringent wine, and properly this is what happens. and do not put anything on the wound, neither cork nor anything else that has oil, lest it cause rot and corruption.
Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture.
and many times this has been done foolishly, and it has brought about death or corrosion on the patient many times; and let the strapping be softer and less forceful than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may happen there, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, then it is not advisable to put stars on it. But enclose around it, in lieu of stars, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one day or two that the wound is starting to bulge, then remove what you have put on top of all wine, and put ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment tetra-formation and similar.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, the morning and evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bow be corrected down gently.
And if for many days it does not heal and cannot return to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you must cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these dislocated pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other manner of corruption, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but let it remain until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can;
And if you cannot, leave it alone.
We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make the limbs their natural workings.
Take heed then if it is fresh: If it is fresh, administer topical medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, a spice, and similar others, in the way you will apply any of these things, or all together, and confit them with astringent wine or with an egg white, or with ash; And place it on the wound in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not unwrap it by hand during the day;
And place it on the wound in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not unwrap it by hand during the day; and then remove it, and begin another one, as long as the swellings are removed;
or you restrain upon a well-made piece of cloth; for the properties of linen is that it removes all swellings from limbs;
And if the knot is already converted into hardness as a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity appear. And you let her rest on no razor until she is removed, and the care as long as she is healed.
of the member which is weak after the healing
When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: because one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and it cannot come to the nourishment of the limb; or for a multitude of dressings; or for too much movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so it is weak.
And the care is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, as long as the blood is multiplied in him. And administer baths to him, and give him joy and mirth.
Then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts to the great swelling, and rose water often of tepid water, as long as the swelling corrects to the limb. And returns to its natural shape.
of member wrong after the health When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the bones broken apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function:
so do not believe fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
and this work is blamed, and brings great harm, and by chance death.
However, if the nodules and pain are fresh, it is necessary that they be soaked in hot water, or herbs softening are cooked, such as leaves of wormwood, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
And you apply a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon, and you take the poultice of wormwood, and cook it with lard or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top.
Or you take fat figs, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes is dislocation removed by continuously rubbing and lengthwise with wet hands. And let there be exercised movement to the limb every hour.
And if the tumor is old and hardened, like stone, and the need is to remove it with iron, then it must be covered until the bone, with a sharp scalpel lightly. and put cushions and padding in the treatment.
Dislocation is from any joint out of its place, because of which it cannot move, and the limb is poorly shaped, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, then it is necessary now to bring it back without resorting to splints.
For if one delays, then the limbs swell, and perhaps if one puts it back in place with pain.
For this reason it is not proper to move it while it is inflamed. Many times brings on pain and other aches;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if it is healthy for the patient, then let him remain, until the abscess is calmed.
Then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as it comes back to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
It happens that the jawbones are dislocated, and these dislocations of both sides are according to two ways. Or they are a little out of their places, and softened a little; Or they are entirely dislocated and hang towards the chin, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more disarrangements.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it gently, and do not complain.
And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and put their fist into the root of the jawbone dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; And the other hand should be outside, to make it even.
And instruct the patient to soften his jawbones, and move them in all directions. And the broken bone is placed even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back with grief, even if the two jaws are together, then apply hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset.
Do not complain about bringing it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's mouth is tightly closed without softening, put on moistened cloths in a cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions so that he does not move them to either side or strain himself in any way, but eat light food until the pains are gone and the jaws are joined.
And then chew what he wants lightly, and do not try to open the mouth while eating and drinking until the jaw is well joined and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not brought back to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats come, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is a perdition. and many times he who has it dies, in nine days.
The harness cannot dislocate from within the side and hip, and it is dislocated no times outward, and it is well felt when it is.
And the restoration is that the patient lies quite on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place with the palm of your hand, and it will return.
then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it;
and the head which is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate. if it does not, and if it dislocates any time, reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest as long as he is sound.
And in the same way is brought back the head of the scapula when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways.
That one is when it dislocates to the side of the axilla. And the second is toward the breast. And by chance it dislocates upward, and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate backward for the shoulder, nor inward towards the nerves.
And many times it dislocates toward the axilla, even in those who have little flesh, for at these the bone is easily moved.
In those with enough flesh, it moves hardly, and returns hardly.
And by chance it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder of a hot abscess, and believes that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must carefully examine it until you are certain. and therefore begins the cure.
And it is known dislocation when it is moved down towards the hip, and make a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip touching the head of the shoulder, as if they were one piece. and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its nest, nor move from any movement.
and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching.
and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put their fists below the hip, and lift the joint forcefully upward to its place. and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it up, then put it below; if it comes hastily.
And if it does not come as we have said in hands just after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the minister put on soothing and softening ointment, such as a decoction of elder and fennel and marshmallow in water, and it be applied;
then the patient be laid on his back, and under the  seat a piece of felt even, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the patient on the stool, and lift the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pull the hand of the patient;
and another minister hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down. That shoulder returns all now, and if you see so reset it according to this manner:
and is that you make be present a man who is greater than the patient; and is right toward the side, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and lift the seat up so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, he can carry with him anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner:
and is on place a long stick in the earth, whose head is as high as the bed, and is not too big nor too thin; then is placed under the patient, but that it has drapes above, and the patient is standing on the length of the staff;
Then extend his hand down on one side, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: Take a splint of the arm of great size and four fingers wide, which has the head round so that it may enter through the armpit, according to this form:
Then tie above the head of the splint with strips so that the splint does not press on the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
And extend his arm above the splint's long, and tie the shoulder to the splint, and the arm at the hand's head, then put the arm on the step of a wide plank, and let the hands down and let the body hang down on the other side: The joint returns now.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that you put under the collar of a sphere of wool equal, then put the plaster parilliet of powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of an egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the collar evenly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he moves little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal faster.
and then move more after seven days or seven, and move it. And if it is stiffened and it is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery to three holes, as it is shown in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all these things, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is toward the buttock, and the breast, or back, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there it is administered in another place.
and care until it is healed.
And if after healing pain comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then the patient uses many baths until that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the arm
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated in places, and in places returns;
and it has been dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each shape. And when you join the diseased knife with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus as the abscess comes in, because if the abscess came in, it would be grievous to reset it;
and by chance it cannot be reset completely at all, even when it is at the back; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it comes to death.
And the restoration is, when it is like that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; And his arms should be spread out, and the hands should touch each other according to the edge of the knife, above and below, and push the joint into its chest along with, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is to the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm at the root of the palm its side which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension.
and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
and when the two hands join the joint to its hand, then anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with the yolk of an egg on top, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the collar of the patient, and leave it for several days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the ligament, and let it.
And if you see that the joint is not setting well, start again with the bandaging and the ligament, and leave it so for some days, until it is firmly set. then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed. or you put a piece of fat wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and wash it. and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the wool back on, and then wash it. And thus do it two or three times, until it is healed.
And if you see, so put on a fleece of moist moss heated with butter, and strain it upon.
If it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately when it dislocates, so that the joint is not swollen, or an abscess comes to the boil hot.
And the return is that you put the ailing hand upon a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places it equal, in such a way that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; Therefore, place the patient's back of their hand upon a table at extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts their back of their hand on the table, and the one caring for them puts their hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is well. If not, then let the patient be bound with soothing ointments to appease the abscess, and leave it so without starting again.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then the joint remains twisted.
and does no harm to the patient except that as long as the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all: Then you know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery.
If there is no other remedy but to restrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is not worth anything else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and let it be for 5 days, then untie it and leave as is.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then the hot water cloth, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Never are the two parts of the hand dislocated on either side, never to the back of the palm or the belly;
Therefore is the duty, and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the shoulder, and the bring toward the part where it is disjoined.
And let him rest for a day, and then put it even that day;
And do not bind it, as we have said, and unbind it each day, and make it move, and bind it again;
And do this often, until it is straight, and just as well, if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is sound;
And just as well, when it is dislocated from another place.
Of the dislocation of the spine
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the dislocations jump out without will, and cannot be held, and many times are softened any limb, or both thighs or the two arms or one.
And many times the bone moves to four parts.
That one which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure for this is that you reward it if the gilbositez came from childhood: If there is no cure nor healing at all.
And the one that comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, which has not in all great profit;
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
I say that in the gilbositez that comes to the shoulder before, there is nothing nor health;
and also those that come directly in II ribs, and one cannot cure them except for the one properly that comes to the back, as I say.
and that the patient be stretched on his face in the same place even, and have a constraint under him, that he does not bleed.
then put the splint at the head in the earth, and the other at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two splints;
and be well fastened, the splints as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine straight, until it comes back.
And if it does not come back by this cure, then take a board of III arms long, and put it under the patient, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the patient, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place.
and if you see, do it to the turning wheel that turns by hand. And is that you place two irons at the head of the sick person with one arm, and towards the feet the other, and between each iron, above and below, a palm's width of long.
and have in each iron one hole, where the turning wheel goes, and that the irons be firmly in earth so that they do not move.
and between each two irons have one turning iron, on which the chain turns, and have in the two turning ones two small irons a palm long, to turn the wheel.
and then tie the chain which is among the axles to one wheel towards the head, and the other chain towards the feet to the other wheel, and each of the assistants turns his wheel with all the chain, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is equal, put a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the dressings, and then the splint of a tablet of III fingers long, that pricks the place of the vertebra and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until it is healed;
And if anything comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; And sometimes one administers a piece of wood, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which reason one should not have presumption there. By chance might come death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and not like other joints.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in accordance with four parts: Inside and outside, and front and back;
And more inside then, and less dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens the patient's knee more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee at all. And it is the leg which is near swollen with a hot abscess, because of that the head of the pelvis comes forward.
And the sign of him to whom it comes to the fever, so is this accident contrary to those before.
And the signs of him who has it in front, are that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; Nevertheless, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, he passes over his heel.
And the signs of him to whom it happens in the rear, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place under the ribs.
The return of this kind of dislocation is that you look at whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, if there is no treatment. And there is no need for him to be presumptuous.
And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and this is of the IV manners of dislocation, haste that you return the joint, and the extension inward and outward, and the movement to the right and left; For by chance it will return, and has no need of other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong force, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or to the ligament that is tied above the knee. And another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he thrusts his hands below his shoulders, then he tightens with a strong pull upon the hip. and another one seizes the chief of the ligament;
And extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remain hanging.
This manner of extension is common to IV likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If this does not work, it is necessary to put care to its likeness.
When the dislocation is at the armpit, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy ribs, then put the ligament on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the ligament upwards towards the arm, and toward the shoulder.
then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and extend it outwards. then it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong band above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then hang it from the top of a pole, and let it be two arms long above the ground;
Then command the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers stand with the patient, who together embrace the hips, because the joint will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and restrain the band on the affected leg properly, and on the foot as well;
Then put two splints, one at the head and one at the feet, then place a splint between the hips of the patient to maintain shape. and have a plant of wet cloths around him so that the patient does not shiver, then extend each minister toward him, and the one who is watching puts it in place with his hand.
If it returns, it is good.
If this is not so, place on a [table], and press it as we have said in the chapter on dislocations, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is visible, then it is necessary to extend the affected leg as much as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the one who is watching his pain on top of the affected bone, then press with the other hand and move it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards, nor to raise upwards on the ground, but rather that it be as if the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said about the support on the two hips; and let it be on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said above, and one must press on the joint to the table. and will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put on the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then untie it, and put the splint on;
and if you see that they are even, so strain, as before, and let it rest for three days;
then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inwards and outwards, and backwards;
and do not dislocate again.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at their hip, and if it does not rest at their hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back on their hip, and put their foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two bones that form the knee; And some other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can move his leg to his hip lightly.
And put the plaster on top, and make him rest his leg to his hip, and let them stay together for strong III days or IV, then untie it.
And do not let the patient work at all to go, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes sprained, and sometimes dislocated completely, inside and outside.
And the sign of it is that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts before in the part where it was dislocated:
The returning of it is light, and one must extend it gently with his hands when he is only feeling pain.
And when it is dislocated altogether, it is necessary that you make the patient sit straight, and hold him one minister by the leg, above the ankle;
Then treat the foot with your right hand, then with your left twice, then upward at the front, and gently push the foot upward.
And do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
If it returns, that is good;
if not, begin the work again, for it will return;
And if it cannot return thus, have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert a stick firmly into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around it, so that the patient does not move.
Then hold the patient's thigh with one hand, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the stick, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; Then extend each minister equally, and the stick should be straight between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when we straighten him;
Then put the mirrors equal to the dislocation with your hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg at the bottom, and the dislocation will return easily.
And when it is set right, apply the plaster and dressings on top, and strain it firmly, and tie the leg to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind so that the ligatures are not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligatures soften, then strain it again.
Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for four days. And if he goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come there, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them well without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any knot of the foot or leg, then you must make the patient sit on a hard surface or table entirely straight, and put your foot on what separates those joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
And when it is even and there appears nothing, put under the sole of the foot a table at the shoulder, then strain it firmly, and let it remain for 3 days, then untie it. And let it rest until it is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times happens that the patient dies:
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor bold;
And use at the beginning of things soothing to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; And when you see hope there, then reset now the limb to its place, so that the abscess hot comes up in it.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the heated abscess, and treat the wound as it is fitting, with dried ointment;
and if the dislocation comes with a fracture, and bones are broken, set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it harms you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your limbs and body.
