O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and through its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange everywhere, so has the science perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of its force except small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this have come error and vanity, and are closed the understandings and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of the cautery, and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to climb in the science of anatomy, as Galien says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of joints, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of exit.
And for this Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work little; and similarly in the art of the hand.
We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, if he does not beware lest he fall into error and harm men;
in such a way that I have seen many times more of those who interfere in this science and abandon themselves to their ignorance and lack of experiment.
For I see a fool look at an abscess of scrofulous or the neck of a woman, and cuts the arteries in the neck. For because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I see another doctor treating a stone from a man's body, and the stone was large; so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called for this treatment, and I see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it they would die.
And I see another doctor taking care of the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the doctor, full of ignorance, forced the broken bone onto the wound, and did not put any lint on the wound, and left it like that.
and he commanded him not to unbind it at all;
and so remained until the leg was all swollen and the foot and came to ruin.
I am called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, it was in peace and felt no pain.
But by all means the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it;
and did not cease the corruption to go through the member until the member was entirely lost.
And see another kind which breaks open the abscess and then inflames by the evil of its lordship.
For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not proper that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can remove all that is corrupted.
And therefore, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into II divisions: that is to say, works where there is danger in many positions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you keep guard, so that the foolish ones may not speak badly of you.
If you take your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised;
and leave the hopeful diseases to good health;
and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galians says in some of his admonitions: Do not take care of any bad illness, lest you be called a foolish one."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and cauteries of medicine sharp, and are the chapters ordered from the head to the feet;
and the shapes of the instruments, and the tools of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and this chapter orders and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the head to the foot, and the shapes of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and of the annoyance of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid, and of nuisance, are the longest speech and subtle sciences and the secret answers;
and of this speak most sages, and agree to this;
and I suffice few their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cautery helps universally to every complexion or it has matter, except for if there are two complexions. That is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, some have said and declared that cautery there is great help; and the others say the opposite. That cautery is not worth for disease that comes from heat and dryness. Because the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured for a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness;
and he who says the opposite states that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men. For when you examine the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this word. For I have found it never by experiment.
And in any case, do not interfere unless he who has proven it and knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the appearances and space of time.
Of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and wet diseases. And all the masters assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that fire cautery together with secrets of the treatments and more good than cautery of burning medicine.
For the heat is simple, and does not come forth except to the member which is burnt, and does not harm another member besides that one.
The ardent medicines come from member to member by removing, and bring to the member diseases of bad healing. And perhaps it harms the patient.
The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and was based on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I keep from you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time cauteries should be made, and how long they are to be applied.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, for this reason that the harms coming are diminished with the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they cannot await the time that greater evil does not come to the limb.
And do not ever think, dear child, as the foolish ones do; because to the illness which is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus;
and they say thus; but it is not as they think, because cauteries are not just medicines that change the complexion, and dry up the humors that are the cause of pain, and are more valuable than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and of its power.
And a most important thing is that the disease often comes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the disease and its power.
And these excesses are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered where there are few excesses and moisture, such as cauteries of fire for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true.
but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauteries the last of medicine for those when we administer manners of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Therefore it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of an instrument of gold is more effective than of iron, and they said this those who were learned because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance;
and they said that the lesions of cautery do not cause rot, but this is not true because I have proven it, and I have found that it is true in some men;
and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they said. And anyway when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled;
and if one heats it too much; if done to fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head down to the feet, so that the path may be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to make it by reason of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head as the eyes, and ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and stroke and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicinal solution modifying the head III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can bear. and then make an opening on the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your lap;
after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two fingers come together, if it bleeds then cauterize with the tool called 'olivare', because this is its form: And put it on the spot marked with ink, and make as you descend and withdraw your hand slightly pulling back and forth turning it; Then gently move your hand slightly, and look at the place if you see the bone small. And if you do not see it, then restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
After that take a piece of silk, and put in it soft and moist cotton, and put it on the place, and let it there for 3 days.
After that put on moist cotton in butter. And let it there until the burning is gone. After that treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And they say the ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, the more it discharges. And for this reason, they help to move it.
And they said any of these that one must let the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then sew up what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say others that one should leave the cautery on so long, and put it down so strongly that one lowers the bone as wide as the whorl that women put in their spindles for those that the humors might come out moved.
and one must leave the wound long open; afterwards one must cure and dress it.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all except in certain men where there is a way of fear;
and I seem to myself that I should leave him;
for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members;
and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salutary and effective for me, and from this I operate in thus as a whole health.
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use herbs and pills which are called "cochie," and from purgation of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not effective. Take ward so that the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; Therefore, cauterize there below with that cautery we have said above. After do cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do cautery where it is called "vessels"; and put there those where one puts cupping glasses; and alight your hand so that you cannot see up to the bone: The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it later;
And it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the patient is purged by medicinal fumigations, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of the illnesses, and all of these do not help: Therefore I do cauteries according to two manners, that is to say of hot medicine and of fire.
The cauteries of hot medicine are such that you take a piece of lead and remove the rind and cut it into two pieces as big as your thumb, and then put the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can replace the piece of lead under the skin.
And when it will be replaced, so tie and hold it well and leave it thus for twelve hours. and then untie it and treat the wound with lead, and leave the wound thus for two or three days. Then put a poultice soaked in butter on top until it heals.
After the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if you see such things done of certain medicines burning which I have written or do as I have treated burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done this way. Heat the cautery of which here is the form:
And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clasp or it has the point of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance.
And put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and touch the iron lightly a little, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned.
And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows an abundance of blood.
After put cotton in a wad of silk, and put it on the place for three days. then put cotton moistened in butter, and then treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare," at its whole point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before said of the medicine and of iron do not help him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and then reign so on the place ailing a line of half a finger of long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone;
and guard the jaw that it moves when one brings it up, and the nerve is not looked at except by the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against loss of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even for him who does not know about it, and who is not studying and experienced; and let the work be halfway done;
But I will tell you how to restrain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the sickness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed;
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one puts there opening of medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then take this cautery which is called "point," for this is the form.
After, prick all around the ear of the sick person, or where the pain is felt in both, and move it a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to cut. and there are 10 points around each ear;
after curing the place until it is healthy.
of the mouth's torture
Torments which must be cured by cautery are only those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease;
and do not make cautery to the appearances that come from dryness and  spasm of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torment that moves with phlegm of  eyes and purges of head and gargles, and it is not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point  four fingers away from the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips;
and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery at the top of the ear above a finger below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a finger; and let the cautery remain there as long as the middle of the heart is burned
and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the scalpel that we have put in front, but it is a little finer and it is necessary for the blade to be a bit thicker;
after healing its place as I said before, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then I make IV cauteries: II on the II horns of the head, and I remove the head, and I put in the place that is called “vessels” as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that make the brain swell up.
after the king has treated the head of the patient completely and he places on the nape of the neck the ointment of mustard which is written about or treated in the treatise of ointments.
and this is the manner of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is sound thus, well and good; and if he is not, then make three cauteries of him in the middle of the head descending to the neck, and there should be one finger's breadth between each cautery.
and treat it like the others, and if you see it is getting worse, and the patient is suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is sound;
and let the cautery be called "olivare," as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of herbs and what we have said before;
After the king of the head of the sick person, then I make cautery on the head and under each horn, and in the back and III on the spine of the neck.
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the sick person is suffering, and the illness is severe, then I make IV cauteries on the spine of the back. And let him until the pus of the heart is burnt, and lift your hand. After curing as long as it is healed, and be the cautery that is called "olivare" that we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptic ones should not use fire cautery except that one who is phlegmatic, and it conviene first to modify the brain of herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from bad medicine.
And if it's a child who can't endure it, then I make gargles and chewing modifying the brain often with good meats.
After the king of his head in the middle, and I make I cautery according to what we have said before, and I cautery on the vessel, and on each horn. and if the patient is weak and suffering, make cautery as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, do the cautery subtly according to this manner.
When by reason of melancholy are the superfluities or humors corrupted and phlegm thick, then one cauterizes with those cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by reason of melancholy the superfluities are declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick man is moistened, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to that which is before in the division.
After place the head of the patient; After making a linen pad well, as well as the circle, put it within the head.
And the patient sits crossed-legged, and be held well on all sides;
After applying the linen, take some old sheep butter and apply it. And heat it to a fire moderately so that if one places it on, they can suffer it; After removing the circle from within the head, and let it cool.
And do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is healed.
Or if you see cauterize him by making more points all over the cautery.
This manner of cautery soothes the brain greatly;
and then places moistened cotton in butter and goose fat.
of the awing of the eyes When it comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient a thing purifying the head, and keep him from all moisture, and let him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
After, he commands him to put his head back, and has cautery placed within the head, and has two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one.
And apply the entire cautery to all veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.
And guard against the decrease of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then restrain it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cautery how to stop it.
And at no time is cautery or a hot iron applied below the two bones behind.
And one sees that it is superfluous cold phlegm, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes. With cautery I burn the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries where hair grows under the two bones. And if it is needed more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three walnuts. After he has laid down his head, and you make cautery in the middle with olive oil cautery; and make II cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the II sores, one point below the cheeks.
and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called “olivare”. of this is the form:
And if you see so make II cauteries on the II sores as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
The hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to II manners: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your healthy condition; after draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as like as the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs;
then put cotton moistened in egg white and  a bit of persimmon over the eye, then heat the cautery as follows:
After that cauterize on the figure that you have signed here and there many times, so that the hairs are burned in that place.
and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye.
Therefore lift your hand, and leave it so for III days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the burn is gone; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the skin is softened then begin the cautery again on that same place, as you did first;
and if the hairs are cut off, cauterize them until the skin is raised to its natural place, and it be even, and do not prick the hair in the eye.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a shape of parchment like the leaf of myrtle.
then take French soap and quicklime, of each a third, and grind them together well; and make it hastily so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it over the eyes of the patient. and if the patient holds in one eye only, then you must work in that one, and if in both eyes as well. and put under the eye cotton moistened in vinegar.
and the shoulder of the sick person be in your healthy and put your knee showing on the medicine, and press it and its point all times that the sick person feels burning from the medicine, because he feels burning as well as fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine to your place. And when the burning will be passed, so lift the place of awe, and reward yourself if you see the parchment raised as if it had been raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
If not so, so put back more of the medicine on the place where the medicine did not work, as long as your works are equal, and your eyes set to point;
then put on cotton moistened in butter as long as the wound is wet, after cure the place of the ointment which is called 'diaphenis' and other, as long as it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that no medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin again the medicine on that part which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after curing it until it is healed;
and this is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constrictions;
and let not the right way be returned to him whose study is this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or tilt its head;
after put moistened cotton in water of an egg or in the juice of parsley on the eye;
After heating the cautery which is as follows:
and is shaped at the head like the form of a quill feather, altogether so that it is the cautery;
if you wish, it shall be pointed from one head to the other, and if you wish, it shall also be like a tent;
but nonetheless, this which is shaped is more useful for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and dry out its matter and if it is closed, so the work, and extract fiercely the core.
After put upon the hot heated cautery form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where it touches above the eye, so that your hands do not make a mistake. and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and it corrodes.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If this is not done, restart the cautery again once, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for 3 days.
afterward put on moistened cotton in butter, and treat with the ointment of desiccation until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on an acrid corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what comes in this chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend a fistula, and open its place; afterward put in the fissure one subtle camomile of which this is the form: and make it to the quantity of 1/3 of a plum ; and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and let the patient not move at all so that the melted plums do not run to his eye ;
and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine or ale:
The pimple if it is at its place in a fistula, and the healthy one by miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If this is not the case, it is necessary to administer purging to the nostril and bring the fistula back to the body of the nostril according to what is proper in its own place.
of the openings in lips Many times there are wounds in lips which are called “hair”, and even in children’s lips.
When you treat these wounds with those that we have said in the divisions, and the treatment is not beneficial, then use this small scalpel cautery according to this form.
And put it carefully in those crevices until it comes just to the fountain;
afterward cure the place of cauterization until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the tongue or in the cheek or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and erupted and is enclosed and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all: then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you cut or open the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cauterizes to the bottom of it, and in the last place;
and do thus once or two, after the cure of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed.
and if he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it is not effective, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after heating the cautery whose form will come here after in such a manner that you put a handle on the tooth;
and put inside the heated cautery, and hold it so long that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lightly touch your hand and begin the cautery according to your will
after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it stay there for an hour and spit forcefully.
And in such manner the tooth that was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dry.
of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the treatments of medicine are not helpful, then there is need for cauterization according to two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cauterization of butter is such that you take butter from a churn and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold it until it is cooled.
and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see so moistened wool and cotton in butter cold, put it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron above it until the heat comes to the end of the tooth.
The cautery by fire is such that you take a chain of iron or steel, and it should be thick so that the flame does not come to the mouth of the sick person.
After heating the cautery, according to its form which will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then rinse it.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery of whatever shape you wish, and according to what you are able.
And this is the form of the chain:
of scrofulous When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moistures, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the fire cautery as will be described later in the form, and have it have openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days. And put on moistened cotton in butter until the burn is removed.
After care the place of ointment and tents until it is healed.
When the humors dominate over the channels of the body, and also when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by dissolving medicines;
After you have made the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not come as far as the throat, and burn only a little bit, but of the heart
After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" for that is its form as we have it before;
and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and disease of the body are from cold humors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is ancient, if you make two cautery on the fortlec in their veins; and another cautery removes the lump between the two breasts;
and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that is before said.
And if you see, make cautery by pricking with the whole cautery that is called "poins" for whose form is before in the malady of the ears;
and let the "poins" be up to XXX, or wherever it reaches.
After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at III reins according to this form:
And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, for you make three cuts with it.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then it befits you to reset the dislocation first. Afterward soothe the patient on his back and on his ribs; after lift the heart which is inside the little one to the two of your left hand;
and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then scald the cautery that has two nerves like this whose form is:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and comes the figure of the cautery along with four cauteries;
and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so the figures of cauterization are six cauteries.
and the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes is adjusted upon this nerve for which there are VIII cauteries.
After put the cautery over with powdered silk. after make rest the patient, and do not move the limbs by long time until he is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thickened part of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture until it becomes altered to its complexion, and many catarrhs multiply in him, and the usual methods of treatment do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands. Of this afterward he makes three cauteries, I under the armpit of the hip by the quantity of a die, to all the cautery clavicle, and II cauteries outside the two ribs as long as the figures of the cauteries are at III angles, and have such spacing between one another that they are not joined together when they will rot.
and let the cautery be so well-formed that it grazes the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see a cautery to be made in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and reigning upon the stomach here at a point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called 'point'.
After the cure of the cure we have had before, as long as it is healed.
When to the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great flatulence, as long as it is further removed from its natural complexion due to excesses; and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in divisions, and it does not help him if it is necessary that the patient be treated above his head; and sign of this [III] cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondria, where the man's ribs come.
and have of space between each cautery the thickness of a finger. and let the cauteries be long of the body, and do not press too much your hand on all the cautery.
and let be burned only the half of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet;
and if he cannot, let him be lying down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms;
And if your will is so, you can cauterize these cauteries of the knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make the whole body dry; And let him not come near boiling water, for the skin is very delicate there, and you can see it.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong;
And if it is in the capsule, he feels a sharp pain.
And then when this cure fails to work, it is necessary for the patient to be treated on his head;
and then place a poultice over the area where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, so that it looks like this form: And cauterize the area with the cautery until the skin is burned, and it comes up to the size of a spica, so that the surrounding tissue is all gone.
After the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that of this cautery use none others than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured any time.
Therefore he can boldly work, and it seems to me always better to leave it.
For the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one must do cauteries with the roots of aristolochia and in such manner: Take a root of aristolochia long, the largest that you will be able to find, and whether it is dry, and as thick and as long as your thumbs. and moisten it in oil, and imprint it in the fire, and cauterize with this cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and make small cauteries one by one descending in the part that is below the beard.
And make two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little. And with the cautery remove the pain, and the other on the stomach, and between the two shoulders, and the two ribs of the side where the cautery is between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand at all, but make it open as if smelling.
And they say that no one used a cautery of fire resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess. And jumps outside the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the illness of the mouse of that which we have said as divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are III ways of cautery that all are good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
And do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder.
and lift the heart which is placed in the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and be the elevation that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After it brings out the two nerves inflamed until the hearts are pierced on the other side, and then drives out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, so cauterize all the cautery to three nerves.
After the cure when it has gotten rot for long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
Cauterization is not useful for dropsy, except with the method called "ascending."
When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the head, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in place of the breast; And let the cautery be near the side of the heart.
After let the cautery open for to ward off corruption long time, and do not leave the care of the patient after the cautery. And healing would hasten, and will be together the II intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have in front shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to those that it is here before put.
When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic and are full of  yellowish water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger. and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply with it, thus tighten outside the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form.
After, make on each leg two cauteries at the point of the calf. and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, so that the water drains out.
after the curing of the other wounds that we have said.
When a flux of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of healing; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, so make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or cautery of the stomach, the cautery circulates. And IV cauteries around the belly subtly to all the cautery clavicle subtly, and II cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each buttock, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit any, if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below almecdate poc and poc in triangling, and I cautery below the belly II does.
and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then the face on I great cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and I other on the liver, and I other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle. and let the cautery remain open long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
When you cut flesh, carefully heat the cautery like a razor, and then place it all ablaze upon that flesh which is cut. and leave it there as long as the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood stops;
do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each as we have said; after the cures of dressings beneficial until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on flesh, it will have more help.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes a certain illness that can only be healed by cautery.
When to any comes fistula, and it is filled and hidden rot and moist corrupted, then the does prove to at once a tent subtle, and guard that thou knowest at once the tent how much it has of length.
After heat the cautery like a razor and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the thing went into it, and reheat the cautery until that flesh which is rotten be burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of its need;
and you guard against injuring nerves which are within there, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make those forces but in their fleshy place, and think that she is not entirely perished.
After the cure of the place as long as it is sound, and if the places are healed, and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the places are completely sound.
And if the matters are not removed, know that the place is troubled, and corrupting the bones at the bottom; and thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and they do not take a tablet from women, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the loins on one side and the other with the cautery clamp that we have said before.
And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a line, and it will be more helpful.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds back urine, then I make a cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, on the right and on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a fist.
And I make the cautery outwards towards the back, where it is needed.
And let the cautery be made according to the shape mentioned before.
When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; And when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make III cauteries around the head, as we have said or cautery of the bladder, and II cauteries behind the back
and let the cauteries be cauterized, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
and it is found the location of the viscus department, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip be within the circle;
and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make III cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others;
and cure it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it behoves you to purge the patient of gross humors with foul pills, or other good-looking pills. After that, make a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, some of which are such:
that you cauterize on the prominence of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and wide, and have between each cautery space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
At times one does cauterize in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form:
And if you see, so cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have before said in the dislocation of the hip;
But make in such manner that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the spaces of the groin be seared.
And this is the manner one does for sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg.
And if it comes just to the thigh and leg, so you make II cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and I cautery above the ankle IIII fingers, to the left part one finger;
And let the cautery be a knife, and let the thickness of the heart be burned.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or nearby, cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times with a cautery called "points." And if it is necessary, if he makes more.
And if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization with a knife or circular cautery, and be well guarded in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery in so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more discomfort and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who have made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left them until the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a stomach solution of which he had death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the sage say in cauterization of the hip, because this is how it is done, make one like a nail and be at the head as thick as a thimble, or a little less, and be by entrechetses and from one entrechetres to the other with a space the quantity of a finger's joint;
And let the pliers be over two parts, and also be like nuts, and there be the iron forceps well made;
And this is the shape:
And be heated until it is all red and glowing hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned upon the healthy side;
And cauterize once the cautery is red-hot and let it three days; And then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the ointment cure until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery little because of its danger, and few see who use it;
and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which those who can suffer it, and where it applies to.
The cautery of medicine burning is that you make the instrument between tweezers in which descends the margin of the door, and be of iron or of an appearance long, and in the height have two, and each one the quantity of the size of a coin. And be open below and above, and they join together according to this form:
After put on the boil of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and after your hand over on the boil of the hip. After cast between the two circles of the hot fire which is heated to the fire, and let him for an hour of ten, and suffers the patient the heat and the burn of it.
For there he finds healing as well as fire;
And when the healing is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip of soft wax, and leave thus for three days, and put on butter as much as that which is black from the burn is removed. and let him stay III days while rot draws out of it
and this would be the last aid after the care of healing until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, then you make the instrument that holds it taut according to what you have done in the hip ligament.
and this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written it or treated of the rectification of medicine. Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there is a small hole from fire so that the point of a razor may enter in it;
where there is a small hole from fire so that the point of a razor may enter in it; and put on top one pot or the other well sealed, and put on top alkali and heat and sweet awe, until there is a thickness of it as much as the powders that you have well taken in your hand.
and let him do so until it descends like a fever and chills or as much as it pleases, then take all this matter and place it on coals and on alkali as before.
And then if there will be much fever, and is administered in many works of medicine and cauteries of other members.
For it does this work like fire, and with other medicines which are well cauterized the hip in this way, such as honey, terebinthine, and coals with soap, all these things mixed together.
And the Galicians tell us of a cure of which a man was cured of pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and low back, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed at one time when this cure was made, and he was bathed as he teaches afterward.
And say in this manner that you prick a little bit of green and dry litharge, and grind it well with a pinch of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is held, and cover it.
and let him remain for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then let him enter into a bath until the body is a little aroused, and let him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be cured.
And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's iron, it helps a lot.
and it must be done the cautery in this manner. Take flax and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow which is between the thumb and the foot and the other called fossile.
After take iron of goat dry, and grip it in fire until it is coals, and put it on the wool, and let it until it is stains.
and redo again like this, and do not cease to do so until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is ceased.
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat".
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by excessive bloodletting, or by any kind of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be free of fetid pills or similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "point";
and if you see, make III or IV cauteries with the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a narrow throat when they lie down, and fear; And you find in the last spine of the back and in us its appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form. So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the cautery prick two lines or three, and let the points be near each other.
After curing the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in a place which is in the nerve's sheath.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which they call gout properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot heal it, then it is healed by cauteries in this manner:
Make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick upon the face of the foot, then make cautery to the whole cautery as one calls 'point'. And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then on each knee make three or four cauteries on each side, with all olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need more, then make more, but don't hold your hand farther than until the tip of the cautery is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, so make points around the socket two lines;
and if there remains no pain in the two, so make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, so cauterize each part, and make good governance to the patient and prescribe medicines.
For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When a rupture comes in the arms, and the bones descend to the armpits and it is new, so it is necessary that when you see to cure it, that he does not move it that day; and that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the pain descends from his belly;
afterwards he makes him sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to hold his arm as long as the bones are repaired, and rearranges them in his arms, and  signs of an incision below the rupture on the bone of the elbow, and a whole sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heats up the cautery as this shape is:
as long as it is white and it feels tender Then reset the bones in their place. and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backwards.
and work well the thighs on the patient, and put underneath him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other one on his hips which holds his hands.
then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again another time until you come to the bone. and carefully guard so that the boil does not burst when you do the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the patient does not die, or other harm.
And know that when you do not come close to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also large according to their measure;
after three days, treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed;
after the cure of other ointments as long as it is healed, and lie the patient forty days on his back until the wound is well joined together;
and it is necessary that his dressings be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he tries to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, a well-made splint is given him, and it is worn for another forty days.
And have good rest, that he does not work too much and be careful of excessive filling of drinking and eating, and of too high a braise.
And if he follows this instruction, he will be fully healed.
And I will say here afterwards the cure of tailoring in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, you make the cautery of cauterization according to its quantity, and a third of the heart. After the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
but first sign the place of incision and make a line across the width above the break, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire fire cautery clavicle.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or blow, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
If he is healed by the first cautery, that's good.
If this name, begin again the cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it must grow on the limb that is near, therefore you must make the cauteries as long as the patient is healing.
The month of May is aided sometimes by fire cautery with great help, and also the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
If you can see that cautery, take care if the patient is at the beginning, and if she is healed according to what we have said in the division, and do not send or stay, and you doubt that corruption does not spread throughout the patient, then make V cauteries on his head: I place the head at nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the hairline;
and let your hand so that the cautery comes up to the bone, and as long as the scorches issue out so that the vapors of the thick humors can issue forth;
and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the flesh is spread everywhere; and it is clearly lost, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and I cautery on its neck, and II cautery on the spine of the neck, and VI cautery on the spine of the back, and I great on the crupie and the other below, and II on the two shoulders; and II on the cuts, and II on the tendons of the leg, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
and guard against the nerves that are on the last bone, that you do not burn them;
and never has anyone made a cautery on the bone of the finger, and I other on the bone of the stomach, and I other on the liver.
And know that when more fire cautery is done, it does more help, and moves it to profit.
And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
After cure the place with flour of chickpeas with honey and other cures until it is healed.
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cautery on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb.
And let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh. Then cure with ointments until it is healed.
And at times one makes cautery to the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
And nevertheless, let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exit points of nerves moving the body.
When the illness called "albaras" is present, and the means of medicine are useless, then cauterize with a cautery a small spot, according to the quantity of the hardness of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
then treat with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondine, of each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
The cure of a chancre by cautery
When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it to be arrested, cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the perimeter of the ulcer.
And nevertheless, the sages say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the ulcer;
and nevertheless these do not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted this to happen before.
and a more skillful thing is that it be cauterized with the cautery called "circle," as we have said among many cauteries.
When someone has an ailment called "adubelati," and it delays in dying either because of the superfluity it produces or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries in pricking. afterwards leave it so. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see it necessary to perform the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with this form:
And put your hand in the middle of the illness that is called “adubelati” until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the rot is alleviated.
After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed.
One other way of sickness there is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing else than a gnawing of the limb, because it wastes the limbs as if the lines were dried up.
If you see this illness in a place where it can endure cauterization with fire all at once, then sharpen the cautery, small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the illness is;
After the cautery of all parts as long as you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted be removed.
And then let him be for III days, and put over the cauterized places softened broth with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the cure of suppurations causing flesh.
And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good.
And if this is not the case, begin the cautery again on that which remains corrupted.
And this malady has never been cured by medicine alone instead of fire cautery;
But nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of medicinal herbs in the division: Take it when you need it.
of the sprouts which come to the feet Many times it happens that the feet by fire give birth to a sickness which is called “closed” according to our understanding, and it is a large thing fouled which blunts the foot.
And the cautery for this malady is according to 2 manners. This is to know fire cautery, and cautery of hot water.
Fire cautery is that you heat the iron cautery as it is a vulture's feather, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can reach the nail in all parts, and that it has subtle margins;
After place it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail. And let it thus for III days until it begins to get rot; Then make it an ointment of wild mallows bruised with oil, and leave the ointment upon all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots.
Then cure the place with ointment closing flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them a cautery of hot water; and is in such manner: Take a cannon of iron or steel, or a feather of vulture, and put upon the nail and the althelul, that is to say corns, warts; and put the cannon upon it so that it pricks all around, then put a drop of hot oil, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cannon comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot oil going deep until the root;
and lets the patient suffer a little the sting of hot water an hour; then lets him so, and it will dislodge itself from all its roots.
Thus do one after another, until you have scraped all those that are on the body, then cure the wounds that engender flesh.
When some shiver from cold, or from quartan fever, or another, it is necessary that you make him four cauteries or four on the spine of his back, one cautery between each vertebra. and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery;
so letting him tremble, and will hasten his health from the cold disease.
At no time appear by fires the bathed body, or puss-filled pustules, that come from large corrupted materials.
it is necessary at first when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that its point is seized by fire, or of long birthwort root, or the lentil cautery.
And sometimes when they appear at the beginning, they are cauterized in this manner, and they cannot grow back from then on, but the superfluities that come from them are removed, and they are healed.
But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things. And it is a very grave thing to prolong.
And yet when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and restrain it very much until the bleeding is appeased beneath your finger, and no more drops issue.
then put on the fire olive cautery more small and large as they are all red;
then take it [the cautery], whether large or small according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your hand, and hold the cautery as long as the blood is stopped.
And if it jumps out when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily another cautery from the fire.
And do not cease to make those one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when without cutting of the artery, one cannot well stitch it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of thread, or by medicines put on that have power to stitch blood. And be bound and strained well.
Who will bring it tight with bandages or by placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not benefit it a little.
And if this happens to anyone and there is no medicine present, then one must put his two index fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and well strain until it is stitched above the wound and above the vein. and he must not move them, but often moisten them with cold water that is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stitched.
And make inquiries beforehand of those who need cautery and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses where it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and their origins and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries;
And we have placed this chapter from the head down to the feet, and in this chapter I will follow the same way for those things that are found more easily for those who want them.
And thus as I begin these, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to cures. If they come from such ones who have suffered so much with their sickness that they die easily because of the famine they find in their illness, and because of the greatness of their wickedness. And from these one should have fear.
And of these there is one who gives you his meaning, and says: Wait, I am healed"; and the sickness is spiteful.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more emphasis on your honor than on your greed, and do not open yourself fully but wisely to those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take and profit.
and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored.
And this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Three cheers, our Lords give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head to the feet, for those who find it easier.
Know that this sickness comes often to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the head of the child;
and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown.
And I have never seen this sickness outside of children, and in all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave the work in such cures.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew each day until he could not bear it;
and the water grew so much that he died, and this water is assembled under the bone above the spine, between the heart and the bone;
and the works are such if moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscess is small, that you split in between the chest a wide slit;
and let it also be as long as we II, while the moisture runs;
and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the incisions of the chest open from each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you split in the chest III incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision remove the moisture all outside. Afterward, restrain the incisions with cloth and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave thus until the fifth day;
Then loosen it, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the principal bandage be strained, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is fortified and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and the assembly of the liquid;
for no times is it in front; no times behind; No time in the right; and no time on the left.
Therefore take it where the abscess is open, and the filling of the water, and make it according to what you are able.
and guard that you do not cut the artery; And vein blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When it happens to someone a sickness which is called “catarre” in the eyes or in the breast, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help at all, then the last cure that is done is cauterization with those which one covers the II arteries.
Therefore it is fitting, since you are about to cut them, that the patient turns his head back; after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries are open, then restrain the patient's neck to all the cloth. then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they are then returned.
Then sign the places of the joints, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula from II parts, as long as the flesh comes to the bone, and that it be by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and the cup above, cutting as I do across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood leaps out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of III digits, then sign it and go until the bone.
And that which is necessary of blood to put out is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the filling of the artery;
then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone without a bit of syphac, then cut it so that an abscess does not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
of migraine When ancient migraine comes and acute catarrh, for the moistors of tears and the heats in temples and old forsenee and similar things, and it is medicated by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not help it, if we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes his hair rear up from his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outwards than in some men who are too cold;
And if it is returned, then the patient's neck is restrained with some cloths, then the place is rubbed with some rough cloth, and the place is raised with hot water until the artery opens manifestly; Then take the spatula of which this is the form; then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it upwards with pinches, and separate it well from the webs that are under from each part;
And if the artery is subtle, then it is turned to the point of the instrument, then it is cut from that part according to the quantity of the two heads. For if it is not cut, it will not jump the veins at all.
And treat with blood from VI to III;
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in II places with a strong double thread of silk so that rot does not come before the healing of the wound and bleeding comes.
then cut the excess that is between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with the cuticular cautery up to the bone as long as the extremities are cut;
and this is the best work, if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a warm complexion. For cautery helps to finish the dampness: for that is of greater help against dampnesses.
Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts a good tent on top;
And when they are untied, so it is cared for with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the artery is without cord as you work it, then hurry to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it with your hand that the bleeding be stopped. And if you lack these things present, then put on the place your thumb until the bleeding is stopped, and raise the place with cold water as long as the bleeding ceases, and be restrained as it is fitting.
And it must have between the two knives one doit of wide space, and then when you have signed their two places, and you put the burning iron upon it until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places. And be separated between the two shoulders because it is not well healed of this cautery at all or in any way.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And that which is more to be done and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery trenching on two parts, but the trenches should be well spaced in order to keep their heat for longer. For when the instrument is too stiff, it holds less heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are on the forehead above the head, and it does not benefit medicine at all if one applies it, and you see the face of the patient becoming entangled, and feel on his forehead a walk like a tremor; And where the skin is thick and moist so that the hair of the temples falls out, and the temples are dry, and scorched by the heat of the tears, this treatment is necessary. And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and is that you do to the patient who has this sickness the hairs that he have on his forehead, then make three cuts on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead.
And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and is that you do to the patient who has this sickness the hairs that he have on his forehead, then make three cuts on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead. and let one of the cuts be as two should all remove the forehead down to the root, and the other two as two on top of the cheekbones, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries that are the two on top of the cheekbones.
and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound the quantity of three be on the cross joints.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and plenty of cloths to wipe the blood, then put the spatula sharp from two parts where this is the shape.
From the incision which is behind the temple to the second incision. And scrape all the core which is between the two fissures to all the syfas that are on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract further this spatula. If in the first incision you put the instrument called "cultellaire," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
And put the rib cutting towards the flesh to the heart, and the rib bottom toward the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle joint.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches those who open the heart, and then another part make in the middle furrow until the other side.
And then withdraw blood evenly, and press the wound to stop the bleeding.
Then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put cloths moistened in wine, oil, and asphalt above them, and keep that an abscess does not come.
And on the third day untie the bandage, and then administer a great quantity of tepid water, then apply ointment of basil with rose oil, and other ointments used to treat wounds, until it is healed.
When someone comes down with a sharp catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and the vision weakened, and the whites of the eyes burned; and hair falls out, and where it is touched they feel sharp pain, and the patient sneezes. Then know by these signs that those materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the best remedy for it is as follows.
And it is that you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a great cut in between the brow, and another one wide in the cheekbone. And begins from the slit of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the slit and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then bind above with cloths softened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying things that make flesh come together.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it on these wounds to bring flesh together throughout.
of the stopping up of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or stone, or similar thing like iron; or seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing things such as water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or any other kind of thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
If you see a stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction. And make him sneeze with condiment, and stuff his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear upwards.
Often a fever comes with this cure;
And if it does not come forcefully, administer an extraction with subtle pinches, for this is the form:
If it jumps forth forcefully from the pinches, that is good;
if those do not, administer extraction to the edge with a small fold.
and if it does not jump by those, make a tube of reed and insert the head of the tube or orifice of the ear forcefully, and stuff that which is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube. Then the treatment must be formed, because many times it comes as we have said.
And if it does not come to treatment in such manner, then take glut of this and pluck the feathers, and put it into some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; Then press the glut upon the stone or whatever else it may be, and treat as before.
And if it does not come to treatment from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear in such a way that a pus-filled abscess comes out, and spasms.
And the manner of splitting it is that you first make the patient healthy from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a moon, as long as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your strength, and suck it gently with your mouth;
and treat it until it is healed.
And if it's grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an extraction;
and if it cannot be issued, then administer a spatula gentle according to this form: and administer an incision to that grain.
But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
then extract with fine pincers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the earache therefore that falls in the ear it is necessary that the patient uses a first external of condiment, and opens the ear with old cotton. And lie lying on that same ear where the water is. If it has leaped forward because of this, it is good.
if this is not the case, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, thin and light, and warm them a little in the fire. and he puts in the patient one of pierced from his ear, and it is raised up on those legs of other side, and fire of another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. and does not cease to do that of stone on stone until the water comes out all force, and then it jumps all force;
and if you see this, then take reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end take fire until the most soft part of the reed is burned.
then redo the other piece with other reeds until the water comes out all, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large body so that one can feel it, then administer extraction with forceps; and this is the thing lightest to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms, cleanse the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun. if there appear any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the cage of which this is the form:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the sick person, then succeed in forming all the cage: do this often as many times as all the worms exit.
And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff around the cage with cotton as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not sprout forth as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations
and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see: And whether of silver or of iron be cut out at the small opening, and above over to distill;
and to press inside the distillation to the instrument of iron well made for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the tip carefully cotton; then throw your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the channel, and the channel be in the ear;
then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; And he feels it inside the patient, and if the distillation is a little too hot from the fire then one puts it in the ear. And keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping up of the ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears;
And this same thing happens to people by a swelling of wound, or a boil formed inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes from within the ear, if one cannot see them.
And sometimes it happens that there is a little bit of pus coming out of the hole, and one sees it well.
That one which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of grievous healing in more cases, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the sick person to the sun. and look inside: if you see the  apparent opening, if the work has completely this spatula of what it is the form:
And be smooth and notched in front and behind all plane, so that it does not  bleed the ear;
if the opening is of flesh or the  flesh of the ear, if the hold with subtle pincers, and the cut lightly, until that flesh is completely removed.
And if the operation is done in the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly at the fire, then put it on the body of the ear.
If you feel the opening that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with the Egyptian ointment. Do this until no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in red wine, and powder on crushed vitriol;
and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you draw the tent and move another tent moistened in a cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed. then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop bleeding which are or treated with distillations.
This ailment that comes in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the scope of a spatula from its roots; then put on the place powdered vitriol.
And if without it does not decorticate, then cauterize it with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision worths moves.
and many times repaire, since no thing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of the ankle Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem broken in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hailstorm," and it is an assembly of moisture large in the paper above and below. The works are such:
The works are such: Take ward if the hailstone moves on one side and another, and it is a light thing to know;
Make then the opening wide, then the peel from each side lightly, then take it with the pliers, and cut it.
If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the paper, it does not harm the patient;
And if the tear is large, so assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, do not make force, for the natural healing restores it quickly and prevents scar.
And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and hold the hailstone with tweezers, and the cup and press from one side and the other.
and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not matter;
and when the hailstone is cut, let the salty water eye remain, and care for the place of what generates flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that is generated in the papers above the eye, and it happens more to children than adults, and it grieves their eyes much, and they come to have a cold at the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes;
and for this they lie on their faces down, and sleep like that, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist so that the swelling and the appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press the place to your two hands and feel the snapping between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your breast.
and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him. and press with your two hands on one side and the other, so that the parts are assembled within the circle.
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a fissure as wide, and no larger than the wound one makes at the vein.
and make the skin apart until you reach the parts. And in more than one disposition comes the parts from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract therefore with a whole piece of cloth between your hands outwards, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread.
And guard that you do not add to the fissure, than you come to all the spatula until the eye, than you it bleach.
And if the exinar does not open at the beginning of the fissure, so sharpen the fissure lightly until it opens.
then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in ash and water, and put on the place, and strap with bands.
And if there are such men who grind herbs and put them on to corrupt the moisture which is lingering.
Then cure until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then its treatment with plasters soothing until it is healed.
of hairs of the papers When hairs grow in papers  altered other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, then they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases as habitual tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as long as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes;
and there is the cure according to IV manners: or by cautery with assembled fire, or by medicine hot according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and suture or by caines, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand.
If it is converted, it is good; if not, then you put a needle to all the thread above; and whether it is near the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and you pull the thread upwards to the whole paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, to all the spatula scraping, from the large tear to the small;
then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then place on top of the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if it is necessary for someone who needs, cut a large quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened;
then make on all the spatula across the two lines that you have marked, and begin with wide tears up to small ones; and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the blade in one of the two angles of the heart, then peel it all;
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all the thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air holes the surplus of threads on the two eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you want to do this;
and if not, if you don't care, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four;
then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the parchment comes alive to the suturing of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitches are moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear. and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and it is that you sign the parchment with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches wide according to the shape which is here:
then treat those who are sore with little force equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or one that has thread, and insert it into the figure. and insert another thread next to the large tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and assemble between your two threads evenly.
Then gently lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over where you have marked it, as we have recounted, then join together the two edges of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is converted:
then you should use what we have said about incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of bites is according to this form: and that you convert the paper and the lint inside according to what I have said, and then make two bites by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the breadth of the spatula are. and grip as II shoulder of II parts where you hold the arms
then assemble one and the other subtly upon that which surmounts of the paper of the eye, and hold the II legs of the II parts forming; and leave it so for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrivel and draw together, until it shrinks by itself.
If it delays, if you seize it with some force, then treat it until it is healed;
and when the wound is sewn, and if it has been lifted the paper, and they will not prick anymore the hairs;
and this is the form of the two bones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
The works are such that you prick a fine needle, and it puts the silk thread fine and subtle. then assemble the bones and knot one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long.
then order in the chase the other silk thread slightly, and knot the heads of the thread.
then put the patient's head in your hand.
and be facing the sun so that the works are clear, for it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle at all the chase in the root of the hair placed, and make it pierce into the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to the root, and put that hair into the wound if there is one or two or three or more;
Then pull out your hand as long as the hairs come out of the entire wound in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull out the wound down to all the thread that you have ordered, until the wound comes out through the opening above and that you see it by the sight of the eye;
Then you will pull out the wound and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and flesh grows above;
And if the hairs are small, you accompany one long hair of the natural ones, and whether it is raised with that one or you leave it, as long as it is elongated and then lift it.
of the rot of the eye When this sickness which is called "aleacrati" or the rotting comes into the eye, there are two ways of it.
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens by a sudden blow from a wound or incision or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open that sore, and separate the lips of it, and put inside it lint, and bind it until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that you use in its cure things that dry and constrict. Because if you do those things, the sickness comes back worse than the first.
but use softening things, such as fennel. and the root of water or aloe and linseed are cooked, and the oil of diaquillone melted in any oil, and it envelops a lint, and cures it with those things.
And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not join together according to the form that it was before.
And this work that we have said is nothing but the treatments of this malady, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
This illness which is dislocation is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things;
and the way of the work in it is that you prick a needle, in which it has double thread, and you put it into the skin, and make it pierce from the left eye to the right, so that the threads come in two shoulders of the skin;
then hold the skin above the whole needle, and the end at the spatula wide. And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good;
If this is not so, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits where the cost is inside the paper.
And let the heads of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make them so angled that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "italic" ;
Then remove that cartilage, according to the quantity that its costs are below, from those which follow the paper, then join the two detached parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
Then care for it as we have said of softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a split or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat split below the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; Then carefully between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
Then carefully between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. And one must make the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare everything of all their power how they make return the figure to its natural form;
And the patient himself, according to what it is necessary of work and instruments in many dispositions.
When this soldering happens to a man's hands in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it upwards;
And the extent as pinches, until you cut what is attached to the spatula subtle, which should not be too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula be too blunt nor pierce the eye;
And let your incision, where you have peeled together the assembly, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form;
And let the entire assembly be healed, and never use saltwater in the eye, but clear water, and of barley-water.
Then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in an egg white; And after the third day use barley-water and similar things until it is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two manners: One is nervous and similar to hard styrax, and another which is not at all nervous, but is similar to white moisture frozen, that when one touches it with iron and cauterizes it in pincers, one cannot.
and both of those appearances begin toward the great tear, and cross point by point until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then while you hold it with the pincers of small folds and pull it upwards; then take a needle, and put on its thread the hair of horse, or of calf, or of ox, and a strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and put it in the fold, and pierce it with the whole needle, and tie the fold with a thread and pull it upwards, and scrape all the hair along the edge of the fold that follows the wrinkle and the silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear towards the entire spatula with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears as usual;
and sometimes the finger is stuck to the bone alone, and on the string, as we have said. then the scraping has the whole spatula shape of which this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced.
and after the incision put in the eye a bit of ground silk, and of the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day. then cure of those that are necessary until it is healed.
And if the fingernail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, many times this kind of fingernail is cured with medicines.
and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly pointed according to this form: And lift the eye gently, and if you see that it does not diminish and its root is urgent, so distill from your mouth into the colic eye made of litargire and the red colic and seal broited, and stop the eye until the other day.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil, then treat the boil first and cure it well until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is entirely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the tear harms the eye by great nuisance, so suspend it to the oncine, and cut off a part and not half all, that body of tears does not come.
then distill into the colic eye red which is made of litargire.
The eyes of some men are born no times red, and cover the prunella and restrain upon the papers and turn them to the fire, and seem a rose of baluster.
and the work of this is that the patient puts their head in your healthy hand, then opens the eyes and coils all that flesh with appropriate incisions to it, and sustains with strength.
then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting to the razor until the end, and be careful that you do not wound the eye during the work;
and let the incision be of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the angle and to the small forces by which one removes the seb, as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then use the oil of wool ground or distill with red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of the eye cotton with a bit of yolk, so that it be assured of hot pus;
and if it remains there, and the skin of the wound swells, and you doubt an abscess hot, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess.
then return to your work as long as it is sound, and thus do when the char is attached in the eye by this appearance.
But nonetheless it is necessary that you align the treatment of each weak eye of the natural path; and of the accidental path, in the work of iron.
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
Bloody veins are visible that are covered over the eye, and they take away from its work and weaken the eye all days.
It is therefore necessary first that you look at the eye, in what it is, and where it is, and there is no other sickness except for the uvula. then the coil in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then suspend those veins at the entire body according to his knowledge, and let the incisions be subtle double according to this form
And they shall be two ounces by degrees in the body according to this form:
then one coils those veins subtly, and wipes the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins away from the eye
and guard that you do not pierce the eye at the points of the spatulas, and make this work at the hour of midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins
and when you will have done this, if distill in the eye colic green and red to corrupt those who are remaining from the blood
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is appeased and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed;
and this is the form of the forces:
The wound that is named “arissati” fistula:
when you treat it with cautery and with burning hot medicine according to what I have said before, and if it is not healed, then there is something in it that you should cut into the abscess where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then there is all the instrument of what this form is:
and it is called "aspre chief," and it is made of iron into the shape of a hook, and it is pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
And place it on the place of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed;
and do this several times, then return to their place with drying medicines.
If the bones are joined, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is joined, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew or become infected again, and a bad accident does not happen, know that it is healed.
If this is not the case, if there is no other way than to bring the fistula back to the entrance according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take the forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at 3 angles, and the fist be thinned out to the top as you see here:
Then put it on the bone below the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through this as if he holds his hand on his nose.
And after you restore its place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh has risen and hardened the joints, then it goes to the nerve; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open from all of it and they do not come to disturb the nerve or lessen, then you must tie up the patient;
then heal it, then place the patient on leeches or a heater without injuring him to suck out blood, then put on the eye ointment made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and bandage it with bandages and cloths;
and the manner of the bandages is that you take soft bandages and double each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
Then restrain it from above with a hard band, and reapply the suction cups to draw without injuring.
Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye restrained day and night, and if the ligaments soften, it is necessary that you restrain it much.
Then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good;
If not; If he starts the  bandaging and dressings and linen and suction cups as long as it is healed.
of the derangement of web woven When disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open, and comes out like papers as if grain of resin, and is expectable to see.
then if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part up to the top, then thrust another needle where there is the double thread of the part of the tear. and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement.
then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then remove the needle and put on top the eye half-silk in an abundance of egg.
and let it be until the threads come off with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed.
And at times the wound is restrained by a cloth circle on each side until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes in from the eye, and correct the whitish moisture and bring down the eyes, and insert it into the meantime.
Then extract it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati"  is nothing but a web which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water.
And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it until you see the web coming up to your eyes. Then it is sewn together, and does not descend, and let the light be removed from it, and the patient sees things as he desired.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not apparent as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and feel on the cornea above the point where the conjunctiva continues with the cornea and the crown, as long as the bowel issues.
And when it is out, distill in the hot water mixed with honey, or water where fennel is boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed.
of the eyes We have shown the likenesses of waters in the division, and those that are fitting to consider. if in work according to health.
It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the sun's light, and tie the healthy eye and hold it very tightly.
Then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument that is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eyes are right.
Then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a finger in that white part of the eye to the side of the less tear duct, then thrust the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and retract your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
And it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the point of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument until where the water is, then express it below one way after another.
If the water descends now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest the little, and if the water rises the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is once fixed and it does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand poco a poco.
and then put back in sharp a bit of silk thread, and remove from it the oil inside. Then put by way of defense the eye plugged with a cloth or felt moistened in rose oil and honey, and tie it with the healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our time, put on top a common broth with abundance of egg.
And if the almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you prick the instrument which is called "alberit", for this is its form:
And pierce then only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep into it, but make it subtle, then put in almond, as we have said.
And at the completion of the work, equip the patient with the sleeping mat beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
and be free from all movements, and eat light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day.
Then untie him in that same dark house, and observe his vision, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day.
And it is not right that you do these things in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bandage them because the water rises quickly.
When an abscess comes, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who soothe abscesses.
And when it is appeased, then unbind the eye and put on its face a little border to cover for any day, and let it be in that dark house.
And then from the house a little bit here and a little bit there, and let itself turn in its case;
And know that none of the disciples should interfere in this matter. And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almond cake by which one sucks the water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them see them.
and be properly of a kind of wood: And let the head of each of this same subtlety, and the last in three angles acute.
At times they are born or grow askew and diverse, for which reason some seem like scorpions with many legs;
and if there are such ones where they have bark split of bad color, and if the wood has a good color beneath it. In that one, then, of these branches which is sound and not split, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In that one, then, of these branches which is sound and not split, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the herb on those branches, and they will be pulled out. Then take what you are able to hold on the fine sharp point of a knife as long as you know that that branch is completely removed.
And if any thing remains which one cannot cover, then open it all with the most subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains there. And if without a swelling or abscess chaws, if its short as it should be;
And if it is malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it until the pus is exuded and all the char are removed, then pour  water or wine there. If the wound works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed;
And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is raw flesh on the bone above, which is why the instruments do not come to cut;
Therefore it is necessary that you put in a thread of linen somewhat thick, and be knotted by hands of ours, and have between each knot the space of an inch or less; and puts the patient's shoulder down into its socket with his hand, and pulls in smelling until it comes through the nostril inside the mouth;
and many times do children so at school, and it is an easy thing to him who wants to do it;
then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other carefully as we who are or thread.
Do this until you know that the nostril has corrupted that flesh, then pull the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back straight into the nostril as before;
do this III days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is remained of flesh;
And then put on his new bandage until it is healed, and if he needs drying medicines, use them.
And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which we distill the oils and medicines therein:
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a bowl, and its conductors also:
and if you wish, make a closed bowl, and let the instruments be full for purging the head;
and have a handle at the top to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the bone on the birth
Many times a disease is born in the head called "telul," and it grows and becomes very large, so that it is a visible thing to look at;
and for this it behooves you to cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it, then put on its place the cautery or the burning medicine;
and if one delays to cover it until it is large, then take heed if it is hard, of dusky color, of poor sense:
If it isn't touched with iron for it is a festering abscess, because when one covers it at any time, there comes great harm to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dusky color, and you see that one can fully cover it, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and cure the place with drying and constricting things.
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these works cartilages, it profits little, because in some men.
It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, one sees if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then you must scrape all parts of their core until they bleed, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground. and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other soldering plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
Sometimes in the lips, men have abscesses hard, like grains of rice, and smaller and larger;
Therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each nostril, and take them with tweezers and cut them in each part.
then apply the place after incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood is stained;
and then leave it and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Many times on the gums grows flesh that is attached, which the ancients call "albulus";
so it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and leave the bleeding to stop;
then put on the wound powdered vitriol, or other astringent and drying powders;
and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it; If it does not return after the cautery;
Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough. And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and putrid, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are foul-smelling.
So it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be in your arms, and raise the teeth or scabs as they appear, until nothing remains. And thus do of the blackness and yellowing, and jaundice and other blemishes, as long as they are seen.
and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; If it is not so, begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all healed.
And know that teeth need various tools for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasp with which one removes teeth outside have other forms than those with which one removes between the teeth. And these forms and others be equipped with you.
It is necessary when treating the tooth for pain that you take a while to draw (it) as much as you can because one must not do otherwise; because it is a very high substance until then, we have no excuse to scrape.
Therefore when the patient is constrained to endure pain, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth aching. Many times the patient needs the pain, and thinks it is the good tooth, and draws (it) out. And nevertheless the pain does not depart because of that, as long as the evil is present, because we have already seen it happen to our elders.
and when you are well certain of the tooth aching, it befits that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula strong to protect the gum from all parts;
then bring it to your pliers or very fine forceps at the first notch and notch, until it is well spread apart, then firmly secure the pliers. and let the patient's shoulder be in your holy between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After you have pulled the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and push it gently inside from each side, and move it as you did at first.
And if the bone is pierced and broken, then you must fill it with bandages where the perforations are; and gently restrain it with pliers so that it does not break when restraining.
and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And therefore take good care that you do not break it, and remain a part of it, and return to the patient through the wickedness of the root greater pains than the first.
And beware that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone and bring no one to what we have recounted.
but bring forth at times by the opening of these great illnesses due to the roots that remain, or because of the jawbone they break, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt;
and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply ground vitriol to the place;
and if that does not help, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, to which one pulls teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth;
and these are the shapes: And let them be thick members so that they do not bend when pulled, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold the parts.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put on the place moistened cotton in butter every day or two, as long as the area softens, then use the pliers called "algefri," because the jaw resembles a beak of attention;
and be made inside like a file, and that is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to issue with all these pincers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put there the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a spatula, because of this is its form.
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if its root jumps out of those, it is good.
If these are not there, with the help of all your instruments, as their forms come after here:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has II reins, of this is the form: and other instruments which are in front in the order of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles great pliers, whose form is here:
And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted.
and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument according to what their works and the illness demonstrate to them, for there are such illnesses where the old ones do not teach any instrument because of the diversity of others, and if one does not break the bone or other bones, or where it may occur, then he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, as what is here is the form.
And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it.
And then restore the place with suitable medicines for them, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and it cannot be filed or trimmed:
then the edge; And if it is near with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is here, and resembles a small beak, and be of sharpened iron at its summit:
And the cope a little and little with hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a tool like this is its form.
and is also like the file with which one makes needles;
and with a file smooth the tooth little by little in hands gently, so that it doesn't move until it falls;
then smooth it in the end with no scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then file the sharpness until it's equal, so that it doesn't prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth before loosens, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he doesn't bite, and you have cured them with medicine restraining, and these don't work;
then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver threads become green and corrupt, but gold never changes.
and let the thread be moderate neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you see the teeth being crowded together, take the thread and the double end between the two healthy teeth, then put the head between the teeth yours, if there are one or more, until you come skillfully to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering until the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the head of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue;
and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it unties, or the threads break, so strain it with another thread;
If it remained and would serve thus all its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the placement of the II healthy teeth, and the II mine, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said.
and no one intervenes who is not wise and suffering, and never once does one make the form of a tooth from bone of calf, and one puts it in the place where the deficiency is, and one restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
Never once is this ligament that comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound joined;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hands, and lift the tongue.
then cut the nerve cord wide, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or knot, and that is due to a wound, then put the probe and cut wide that nerve.
and keep that incision not too deep, for the artery which is underneath;
and when you have done that, then lift the place with a rose and white, or with cold water, then put underneath the tongue a tent of linen;
and bind the patient every night so that the place cannot close up.
And if bleeding occurs, put on the place powdered vitriol; and if the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentil cautery, which is good for this. Then the cure of other cures until he is healed.
And if you see it with a black or hard color, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an ulcer.
And if it is turning white and there is moisture, lay the ointment on it, and apply it with a small spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other. And if the patient refuses to comply with your work, put on crushed vitriol until it is whitened, then return to your work as long as you draw out all the pus.
Then raise the level of ash and earth, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes comes from within the throat growths called "godaths," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
If it is abscesses hard of small size and red colored, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood. But let it be until it is ripe, and then you will part it, where it would break by itself;
And if it is of white color and the root is subtle, have the instrument prepared to cut, but first look whether the abscess is warm and calmed.
Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his shoulders be on your healthy side, and he open his mouth and you put the instruments between his hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument.
And it is of silver or thin iron as a knife:
Since you are pressing the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and put it in the middle, and draw it upward more than you can.
and do nothing with the cloths, then cover with the instrument from this is the form, that seems like forces; and nevertheless the head are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel;
And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs for this is its form: And be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other.
and when you have cut one of the abscesses, then cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and vinegar, and thus. And if a discharge of blood happens, then gargle the patient with water, or juices of pomegranates boiled, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healthy;
And no other abscesses ever arise in the throat other than the two tonsils, so cut them thus as the two tonsils are.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was growing inside her throat, namely the small abscess;
and I had closed the entire throat very tightly, so that the woman could not expire through the airway which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained like this for a day or two.
And the abscess was so high raised that it had to have been put II reigns by the II openings of the two.
I hastened therefore, and placed one finger in the throat, then pushing out through it, and pulling out a large portion of the bowel;
then I put the other end into the other opening where it was lodged, and opened the mouth and pressed down on the tongue;
after he opened the abscess and cut into one part, and there came out only a little blood and thus the woman's throat was unblocked and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time
and the abscess grew back again, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large
then I grasped it and cauterized it inside the throat and then it stopped growing.
and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
of the grape
When the stem returns to the grape and it is swollen and long, that is called "perpendicular
and if it is small and round, it is called "grape".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the pus-filled abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it behooves you to cut it.
and that which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is bloody or of a rust color or black, then it behooves you to widen the incision of it. For there is great peril for the patient.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument about which we have made mention earlier; then place the needle in the eye, and treat it with this, and cut it at the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term;
because if you cut more, so it harms to the voice and to speech;
and after the incision, use of those that we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it as long as it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid to have it cut, then you must use something to lessen the fear of cutting.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and confides with boiling water cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and in employing the end of this instrument, from which this form is:
And have on the head a tuft where one puts the medicine, as the end of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape;
and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and the mucus flow from his mouth outside, so that it does not go down to the throat, and into the chest.
then hold your hand over the whole medicine and press on the eye, for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it soften and the bites of the medicine be calmed.
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton in the canal of the eye, until the cotton rests on the eye.
and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after IV or V days.
And if you have need to begin the cautery of the medicine again, then begin it again, and after the cautery wipe around the eye, with cotton dipped in butter, and purify that which is around the medicine.
and be washed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery;
If it is treated by fumigation according to this manner, take wormwood and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and savory and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them in a pot, and put water in it, and boil.
and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and within the pot have the instrument heated according to this manner: And it should be of silver or iron, and one end of the piece put into the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is dead.
Afterwards it should be repeated often until the eye dries, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen. and do not make any of these cures except at the decline of an abscess hot.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog and put inside its head a bit of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot. for the yolk of egg does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times it has been put in the throat bones or spine of fish, or any other thing;
so it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
and that which does not open for you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat may be cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this thing were expelled by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cloth, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, it will harden, and then you will draw it out;
and if it does not come out as we have said, then take the instrument of wood according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head raised high; And guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it come alive, nor push bone inside.
And move it so that the patient puts the instrument in, because he must know if the thing is eased or not. If he pushes down, or he pulls it hard with all the instrument evenly, until it is hard.
Of the throat cutting
At no time is the bloodletting medicinal, as I have said in the division, by means of medications; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
And if you see the wound, treat it with all small instruments, or subtle tweezers that are fit for this purpose.
And if this does not work, then take a horsehair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the end of the horsehair into the fire hot, and do this often. And the patient remains with a fever every day.
Then take full a cup of cold water, and open his mouth, and let him pour it into his throat without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the wounded person feels the water, he falls.
And if he does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I mentioned in the smoking of the grape;
do this many times, for it will fall without resisting.
And the manner of the smoking is that you take a pot or it has live coals inside, and let the pot be covered with a pierced cloth in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument;
then throw your smoke in it, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the wound;
and the wound will now fall, and if it doesn't fall, then begin the smoking again many times.
and suffers the patient thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and drinks no water.
And therefore it is necessary that she be cured by this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats bleeding is like, when one can see it, tongs curved to enter into the throat. and has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness of lime so that what it takes it cannot leave.
Many things similar to abscesses are, according to those that the memory comes after here from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size.
and it is in two manners of which one is in its very same appearance, and from that which it holds moisture.
And the second manner is for the eyes where they are on the body.
for the abscesses of the head are other than those of the base, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one must not pierce until the boil is mature according to its accomplishment.
And if there are of such kind that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left as long as it is rotten and swollen, by chance the tendons and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Or the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay piercing until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb.
Or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then if it is ripe.
And it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess before complete digestion has occurred, except for the one that is below its base, so that it does not push out and become longer within, and a fistula comes from it. and not be able to heal in a great term.
And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is done according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the fever departs, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and healing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
And it is necessary that you make the perforation where more dependent the base of the abscess, and where it opens with pus;
and be the perforation of the long side of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal parts where there is no folding. In these that are dislocated, according to which limb.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is worth while that you let the perforation remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before these, then the body of the worm will be lengthened, and it is full of much filth. And by chance they harden the lips and deepen them.
And if to any abscess that is perceived according to the width of the body, according to what the members have need.
And it is necessary that you bring in small pustules, small openings; and in large pustules, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if it has such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the heart, and cover; when it becomes like a shroud, and is dead, then it is necessary to do the same as with boils;
and if it has such that are cut in three angles, and if it has such that one covers like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angles;
And if there are such or one makes a round cut, and other cuts and seeming cuts.
Those who have no chief, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully;
And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected a great amount of pus, and you pierce it, if you do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing from it; do this many times little by little, until all the pus is gone;
Likewise if the patient is of weak strength, or a woman carrying, or a young child, or an old man decrepit. For the spirit sometimes trembles with the issue of the bowels, that perchance the patient dies, and you do not lose yourself.
Therefore, avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have pierced your abscess, then wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, apply tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must put a tent in each one so that they come against each other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin and stitched it back together, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from flax cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
then the abscess will heal, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then administer cold water and ice, and moisten the cloth, and put it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book. And if it is during winter, and the place where the abscess or wound is is very sensitive, then you must put moist tents and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil on top;
And if it is in this state, and the limbs are fleshy, then it behooves you to put upon them soft cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
And then untie the abscess and wipe it and treat it as is proper, until it is healed.
And this it behooves to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
as I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is this chapter.
When the heart of the head comes little abscesses, and are manners of ours that are in webs, just like the braiding of a tunic, and there are many resemblances.
There are some that are fatty and such as those which have moisture also like poultices;
and there are some that are hard and stony in shape, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
And the works of the waist are that you experience to all instrument which is called "entromissoire", from what the form comes after, what thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then lift it up by the long end.
And when the moisture is drained, then scrape it without leaving the skin which contains that moisture, for it returns as soon as one leaves it so;
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; And remove that which is left over of the ointment.
And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that there is no more ointment left;
then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds in its fat, then cut it according to this form, of length; and you dig out the pus, and its skin from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the core where it lies;
And if the artery works against you, then do what I have told you afterwards.
And also do for an abscess if it is foul, and how to cut and cure as I have told you.
And the boil on the abscess festering and moist, it is lighter because they are of little blood. And if to some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and of these old abscesses that I scraped or head of an old woman;
and found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; And if one had made none of them, one would have done as well a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming or chief,  for that which come to the head of children and to the roots of the ears, let the opening be always towards the most dependent place, in order to drain better.
And the cure as is proper.
Many times these abscesses happen in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are bad, and are intertwined with each other.
And each scrofulous [affliction] is properly inside its part, like the boils and abscesses of the head, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrophulous [afflictions] are many.
and the resemblances of these scrophulous [afflictions] are many. There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.
In that one therefore that you see of good disposition to the touch, and resembles the color of the body, and moves in each part and is not at all averse to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep;
so it is necessary that you cut it from above and the skin of each part, and extend the two lips of the heart like incisions, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
and the probe and probe, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not be the spatula or trowel, so that the hands escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and tighten the wound. and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal.
And when the hand is stained, return to your work, until you have completed it;
then if there remain any small pustules on your index finger, cut them and remove them.
And if there is a large vein at the base of the pustule, it is not necessary to cut the pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang, without causing pain.
then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you cut the whole scrophula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining superfluity for the size of the scrophula. So it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk forth, and the count as we have said.
So it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk forth, and the count as we have said. Those pustules that hold too much fluid, pierce them where they appear to be ripe;
and pierce them as described before, depending on the location, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption. and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and that is the writing of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cut in the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and one does not help with this, because all the veins and arteries of the patient are hot to those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the almonds.
When the patient is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the stylet, not in the cartilage;
And those [parts] are so suitable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to the entire circumference, then cleave [it] as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the sifac, as we have said;
and is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel which jumps out of place which is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open a bit.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them together alone except for the cartilage.
then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says one does not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with the wing. Then cut open the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are kept from death;
and for this, the elders command to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they command to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
and I shall tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young lady took the knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the peritoneum.
and I was called by her to cure her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and I see well that it had not struck a vein nor led further than the throat, and the veins were coming out through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until it was healed;
and the young lady did not have any further problem, except that she had a hoarse voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition;
for this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
This abscess is called "a hernia in the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is very common in women;
and it exists according to two manners: Natures, and accidents;
Or nature has no engine.
And the accident is in two ways, of which one is like pus to us, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from our artery; And there is fear in it, and it does not behoove to work fiercely except in this one that is small, and proves and searches the entire introduction: If you find it like our pus, and cannot to any vein, if you cut it, as one cuts the pus, and the track to its entire tip, if there is any. And surround it well soon, and cure it as it behoves, until it is perfectly healed.
Many manners of pus are, which I will say all the appearances;
And now it is necessary for me to say all the difference which is between us and dislocation.
I say that a dislocation is sometimes accompanied by fever and inflammation as long as the boiling (or inflammation) has not passed, and putrefaction has come to completion. Therefore rest the fever and heat.
With the sprain there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a swelling, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a bruise, and becomes large.
And there are according to its appearances, whether it is thick or moist, and of many colors as I have said in the division.
It is necessary when you come to the cure of the new, that you try and inquire first to all the instrument which is called « entromissoire », according to what its form will come or chapter which is afterwards.
And the manner of incision of an abscess from a sprain is that you prick or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points (of the instrument) and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then let it be according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the intromitter, and take heed of those who leap.
If moisture runs short, whatever color it is, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
and if after the intromitter no moisture comes, know that it is fatty, so treat it with a cross and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape each side and ward the cloth where it lies so you can draw it out healthy with the needle.
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times.
and if some remains and it does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and drain the wound, and put on soothing things above, an abscess hot, and treat it with other cures until it is healed.
and if it is large for us, then we sew the two lips of the wound, and treat with those who create flesh.
and if the vein is pulsating for you contrary or otherwise hasten and apply the place of crushed vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, as long as the wound suppurates, and rest the boiling of blood. then return to covering what is remaining from within.
See here the forms of the introduction instruments, and there are in three ways: large and medium and small;
and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are in three ways: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula;
And they are also like the needles that one sews with sorcerers, and they are of citrine iron or silver, and the yellow ones are more valuable, and they are more proven from black lead to encircle the curves of fistulas.
And they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The shapes of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here:
and there are probes that have two curves in three ways also;
and there are probes that have three curves, and they are also in three ways;
and there are probes that have two curves, and probes of one curve only, and they are in three ways;
and all of these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these things that one does is cutting, and there are some which do not cut more than from one side, because we skin them, for this reason one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
And of these introducers are the probes put into handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses.
and there are three ways. large, small, and medium, as you see.
and one does not use them more than in fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and flanks, and similar places.
and at no time is the other instrument small, seeming to scrapes of fistulas, according to this form, which one drains blood. and put it once in its place which is wholesome to cutting of veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they seem like women's breasts.
and remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must follow this form from line .b. to .g.: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound,  healing flesh, then join the two sides of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
and if the breast leans down and softens due to its size, as it happens with women, then make two incisions above it. so that one hangs from the other at the end of each, so that the larger piece contains the smaller, according to this form, from line .b. to line .g. Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer there what we have said of stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, for that the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and let it stay until it dries the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come from under the arms are kinds of hard scrofulas which have edges, and some contain moisture.
Therefore those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.. And when all the matter that is in the abscess is emptied, put the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment after this as long as it is healing.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofulas, then cut it as we have said for incisions into scrofulas, and if the wound is bowed inward, then administer cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is severed, and the skin above is seared shut, then abscesses often arise, and it also happens to the swollen vein and abscess.
and if he knows this is for the artery, then let the abscesses grow long. and when you feel it in your hands, it feels like constriction;
and when it is for the vein, then it appears red and hot.
and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and at the neck and in many other places, and is very large. Therefore it is necessary to abandon the treatment of iron, and whoever is at the head should also abandon it, and in those who are swollen with artery felt through the long skin;
then work the incision carefully, and depart beautifully the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
then put under it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in II leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in the temples;
Then point the place which is between the two joints of an intromissoire until the pus that is there, and be careful of the abscess.
Then administer the cure that engenders bowel, as long as the ligament hangs; Then cure those of ointment coming to these, as long as they are healed.
And if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you tie with your hand those that you can of the abscess to all the skin, then push the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and let it have a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligament of one of the two parts as the two ends of the thread;
And if you doubt that the needle isn't far enough, reinsert another needle through all of the pus below the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads back in four places.
Then cut the abscess until all of the excess comes out, then cut away the superfluity from the core and leave what is attached.
Then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then administer care with tents and ointments until it is healed.
As abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are burned or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often at the shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and it is a painful abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain;
And when it is restrained firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in proportion to the body, but below the core;
And keep it still from all sides, and do not go forward or backward, neither sideways nor up and down, and the one that is in joints should not be covered by iron. For fear it might contract. And the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin into a pad.
And the one that is on the head or forehead, make the skin into a pad. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, then suspend it with a sling, and lance it, then drain it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed.
Sometimes there appears in the belly and nowhere else a tumor, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its appearance as such, and is the root subtle, and the head large;
And there are some small and some very large.
and I saw the man who had II in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had small roots, and they were slightly split, and pus oozed from them
I cut them open and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI III., and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the vessel is white and moist and of subtle root; if it's cut with a broad spatula, and be in your presence the fire cautery.
if it's cut with a broad spatula, and be in your presence the fire cautery. Because at the incision often comes many large hemorrhages of blood, and if the bleeding does not stop, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient is frightened and afraid of the incision of iron, then take a thread of wool well made, and tie the vessel as we have said, and leave it for II days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of lead until it heals the articulation, and it will be healed by it without work.
and if the roots are thick, if there is fear to cauterize even for the belly, but you may well cauterize half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cauterize the thread that is of dark color and poor sense and milky appearance.
For this is an abscess encrusted, and I will come to the cure of ulcers after.
when the head is carried If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or fissure of the body, and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind;
and if it is by the rupture of the body and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens with diverse issue. And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its sides it returns, and then returns again, and perhaps it is seized, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and for heavy work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it at all;
and if it is for blood, then open by these signs the abscess thick and hard, and is filled according to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, then it is puffed by touching, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
and if it is for windiness, then it is puffed by touching, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. So you must leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have said to you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bile, then you must command the patient to hold his arm, and be outstretched straight, then feel all around the belly; then command him to move his bowels between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess above to the whole great one-inch. then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the two ends be tied together.
Then work on the half of the abscess extending over the linen, and put your index finger in it, and probe the interior. If you find it stuck to the linen, untie it, and bring the interior out of the depth of the belly;
And if you find it boiled, take it with the pincers, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go beautifully around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and insert the two needles back into what you have done in crosswise so that you make it pierce.
Then strain the abscess in four leagues on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them there as long as it purges, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and soft, then the care of it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and soft, then the care of it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is proper, and bind the place.
of the ulcer We have said in the division the appearances of sores, and how one must work them by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron;
and we say that a sore  begins in the marshes, and great caution is needed in its cure, and ancients said when a sore is in a place where one can scrape it like sores which are on the nipples, and in the groin, and in similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is in the beginning;
no one has ever cured them before me.
And the work, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black blood at any time.
then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then put the patient in good condition to do the work;
then throw your incisions or ulcers and the hair from all parts and the bone from all parts without leaving anything.
and let the blood flow completely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped. then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and hypoarche, for it is a mortal thing;
Therefore when you medicate this semblance of dropsy which is called "eclights" and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as gout and diarrhea and similar things; if you do not touch iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: Lift the patient straight on your hands, and the assistants press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the basin, then take the spatula spine according to this form: And shall be sharp of II parts. To a point, and nevertheless, it should not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when one inserts it, and one cannot bleed it.
Then look if hydropisie is formed towards the intestines: If it is appropriate, that you cut in below the hip bone, three fingers to the right of the hip; And if hydropisie is due to the disease of the liver, then the incision should be made on the left side of the hip bone, three fingers.
And if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right, and it is not appropriate that the patient lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not run to the weak place.
Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and it will burst, and lift your hand all over the spatula between the skin and the fascia as much as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or less.
then pierce the shaft as long as the spatula reaches its eighth place, and this is the level of the water, then remove the blade, and put this instrument in which is the shape: And it resembles a silver chain that is subtle, and it is of iron or light steel, and on the lower part, there is a small hole. and where it costs from one side, III pierced. and II on the other side, and I on the other;
and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which the writers cut the feather:
at the top is the  alemele, so that when the instruments come to the point, it descends now on the instrument;
empty the half or the third part, because if you empty more than it is proper in that hour, by adventure the patient dies for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death;
but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
Then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is now held by the heart that stops the opening which is on the surface, for this reason I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner.
Then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering these, and treat the point a small quantity.
Do this every day, and keep from probing until there remains but a little point of fluid.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you let too much fluid out, so cure him with  earth or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and have him drink. And cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I have said before.
At times children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary, then he must see to every little detail very carefully according to this form:
Then put in the hole a small plug of lead, and tie it and keep it so for three or four days, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the plug, and make water, and then put it back.
And perhaps it does not work because the urine coming out does not allow it to be closed.
He whose hole is small, if he is medicated with the clove of plantain, as we have said, it will widen.
Those who do not have the urethra in its place are blue because none are born with the urethra at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards. And cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the mouth, and this is a bad illness.
And the way to operate is that the patient lies flat on his back, then they extend the head of the penis and the scrotum as if it were a feather, so that the urethra falls in the middle, as it should;
And guard yourself from the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, with the stanch of those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the blisters of the penis Many times this albata comes in the region, and is a disfiguring appearance of flesh;
And there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
So it is necessary that you prick them with the sharpest needle and cut and cleanse all of them, then put upon it moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment. Then cure it with Diaphicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the boil is malignant, of bad color and pus, then you must apply a cautery to it.
When you have cut it open, and if the albata is in some part within the penis and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the albata that is inside first; and when it is united, care for it well.
For when you cure it together, make sure the head of the shaft is not pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its shaft and groin.
so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupt, then cover it with a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and veils, then cure it with other dressings until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauteries help with two kinds of positions together: that is to say, in the reduction of blood and against corruption.
and if the head of the shaft is corrupt and withdrawn, it is necessary that you place a chain of plank in the shaft and let the patient urinate among them.
and when the skin is irritated at the head of the stick which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the instrument until the tendons are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides;
and if it is a difficult thing to discuss these, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the spatula any pox on the head of the penis and the skin;
then carefully separate them, and put between them the fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not irritate;
Circumcision is not a wound of continuity like the others; nevertheless, when we do this work of our will, and properly to the children, then it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not say the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the healers who did circumcision around the Dal, and to all strength, and a whole scalpel;
if it was the shears because there are two of them, and by chance if one cuts above and remains below. or it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is the Dal is not assured the tip of the member;
and at the purification of the angle by chance escapes the iron, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted it.
Of the modification that is made by force to all the linen thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
For when you press your hand, so equally in all soul tension; but that the child be well stretched around the skin;
and be the manner of the first work that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only force him to tie the thread around the penis and then let him rejoice in all ways that you can;
Then make it be between your hands straight, and bring back the forces between your hands or beneath your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
Then put your hand to the shaft and blow where the heart is, and pull it up as long as the head of the shaft is within. Then purify it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one point and the other to the other.
Then purify it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one point and the other to the other. and hold it as II does by the second loop to the pocket and to the index finger, and cut between the two loops, then lift the heart upwards carefully and pull the head of the shaft. Then let blood flow drop by drop, for that is the measure. and put powder on and on the powder the drape is glued with a yolk of an egg cooked tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and let it remain until the next day, and heal it with another healing as long as it is healthy.
The form of the forces at the purification is this:
the two arms should be straight and sharp, and the arms as large as the hand equally.
The error of purification is when the kernels inside are at the incision.
Therefore it behooves you to extend it to your fingernail, so that the lesions make an abscess;
and cover it equally, and if you cannot hold it on your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cover it.
And if they pierce for III days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, leave it until the abscess has calmed and slightly peel it.
then cover it as you can, and keep from the part of the rod, it will harm it nothing.
Therefore cure the place with things softly wound a wound of powder, that we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts too much, and it goes upward, it will not hurt.
Cure therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
holding back of urine
The retention of urine is from an obstacle in the stone, or blood clotted, or a bowel, or fatty substance, or similar things, that we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is from the stone which is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it befits that the patient be bent upon his knees. And let his feet be placed on his back, and stretch his belly from the upper part to his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can. and therefore it constrains the neck of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, for which the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer to him extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", for this is its form:
and be of silver, finely wrought and light, like the feather of a bird; and be the shaft a palm long and a half, and be finely wrought at the head.
And the manner of the urine's discharge is that you take a double thread, and tie to the head one piece of wool or cotton, and put the end of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut the superfluity of the wool and bring it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and rue leaf, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
then gently put the syringe on the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis above towards the bud;
then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and feel the patient's feeling coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except for those who lead or where it goes is twisted;
then stretch the thread all over the wool and pull it, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and make sure the urine is correct;
And restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
When sores or blood come in the bladder, or rot is assembled there, and you see them distilling sharp waters and medicines, do as to all the instrument that is called “clepsedre,” and this is its form:
It is closed, and if to the III perts: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see;
and the eyes cover because by this the medication is such that it stops well the member without addition, if one can draw out the moisture and push when necessary;
and when you see fitting your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the catheter into the moisture, and pull with the pulling which is inside;
if you draw the moisture to the catheter, and then push firmly back the pulling inside; if the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one cleanses the bladder:
And is of silver or of arch-wood, and is the head higher.
and below to the breast where the bones fall;
then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see to be used for enemas in it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good doubled thread, and heat that moisture on fire;
then put the head of the enema into the rectum, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly through; then put a strong thread through these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a hoop, and put inside it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do as you have done of the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
and we have said the difference between the stone engendered as rain, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work of cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis;
and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder so often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety;
and it appears hareng [unclear], and grieves the patient his penis, and it hurts him many times, and then becomes red; and to many of these jumps the foundations.
and it is light healing in children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old people, and it is as moderate, to those who are between youth and old age;
and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by clyster, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and loosen and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and comes out sometimes from its high place;
then make him sit between your hands apported, and his hands be under his thighs so that the bladder be entirely declining down;
then press and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone.
And if it does not fall upon touching at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult. And put it in its base, and seize the stone, and when you feel it with your right hand, then move it to the bladder neck.
Then press upon your right, and put it out to the outside where you wish to cut.
And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part where one makes the incision.
Then put the spatula cuttingly, of which this is the form: And make between those who are between the testicles and the base, neither in the middle but at the side of the left hip.
and be straight on the stone, and your thighs should be even or foundation, and let the hips be wide outside so that it is wide from the outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
by adventure the press if the thighs which are or foundation, that she leap be without work;
and know that there is such stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is grated to issue;
and if there is such which is smooth, seeming like a gland, and round, whose issue is light.
To this one therefore where it has angles and margins, make the hips larger;
and if it does not come out, it is necessary that you extract it with tongs which are like a file at the head, so as to tighten the stone so that it does not escape. or you insert underneath it the subtle curved instrument at the head.
and if you cannot engage it this way, then enlarge the hole and if the stone is covered, strain with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, and then remove it with the instruments, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
And if it is very large, it must be cauterized, and make a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the place where the lesion cannot be sutured.
But nonetheless, you must try to remove it, or break it up with the tongs, as long as you remove it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, then apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it, and put on top a soft cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess. Then rest the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you set it, so well raised its place with oil and water, then the cure of ointment diaphicon and ointment basilcon, until it be healed.
And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosion, and blood clotting in the bladder, and due to this the urine is held back, which is known in such a manner that without jumping with the urine: Therefore drain your wound well and extract that blood, because if it remains, then the bladder will corrode and be spoiled.
Then wash the wound with water and ash and salt, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed.
And it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his two thighs, and apply the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is or carried by the penis, and fixed in there, and the urine cannot flow out; if you cure it of what I say thus, that you cut it many times, and one excuses the cutting of the stone by this cure. I have already proven this thus.
Take I a piece of iron according to this form and let it be three-angled shaped in one stick.
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
then put the borer into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone. and turn the borer in your hand on the stone peck and peck, until you can feel the stone from the other side.
if the urine comes then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis. It is then immediately broken, and jumps out with urine, and the patient heals.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make the stick in the right place in the stone between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; And care for it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
There happens that stones are embedded in women, and if it happens once, the cure is grievous, and it is forbidden for three things:
One is that perchance the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that one cannot find a well-knowing woman who will reveal her privates, even when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perchance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands;
and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, so it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, then you must take a wise midwife, and put the truth on her, and if you cannot find one, point no matter; I cast mire subtle.
and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her about the incision of the stone. and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her foot or foundation and seek the stone.
and if she finds it, she confines her under her foot, and recommends to her that she put her foot or on the sick woman, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cone, where it is moved appeared, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his two above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small;
and do not move his two above the stone or below, and let the tail be at first small; then push the root into the tail, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can come out further, and know that many kinds of stones are:
that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins.
If you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not come out, then put powdered vitriol, and hold it for an hour until the wound is stained;
Then return to your work, as long as the stone remains, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to aid you in your work;
And if the artery does not stop bleeding, and it is from the artery that is cut, then place the powder on the wound and strain with bandages, and do not begin again those actions, and leave the stone and do not milk it, lest the patient die by chance; Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the eyes are closed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm.
Ramic aquouse is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white substance found in the yolk of the eggs.
and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg. And it is the skin of the yolk between the white syfac that we have said;
and this did not happen at all. And the generation of this root is of weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
And never if it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowing in color, or it is red, or black, or white and watery, and this happens more:
and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, and it appears long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in its own cloth, the abscess is covered with a piece of the egg, and for this reason they think that it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white tunic, then one feels it well;
Therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, carefully probe the entire intro-mittor, because its form is as described above. According to what then comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to our power and the fullness of his body;
then he lies on his back, on a thing slightly high, and puts under him many cloths;
then he sits on his left, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extend the instrument to one of the two ribs near the scrotum;
Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the head among their length until near the point of the elbow, and let your cut be straight when separating the skin of the head up to the white part, and gently peel it according to your power.
Then pierce the white part with water to the wide hole, and extract all the water, and then put your bandages, and cover the white part.
And do not touch the skin of the head, but only the white part; Cut all or in parts evenly the edge of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
And if the egg sac were in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white part.
Then join the two books of the heart to one seam, then treat it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the flow of blood.
Then cut the testicle to all the suspender, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches; so cut the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in rose oil;
so cut the other part in the same way as you did the first one, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in rose oil; and put more wool soaked in wine and oil on top, and place the two cushions on top, and put doubled cloth above it, and tie it up over the whole linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and use wool padding according to this appearance and be assembled by stitching at the waist of the breeches, and one of the arms reaches over the foundation up to the back, and the other to the armpit part;
and the other two sides over the two angles, and let the whole restraint be assembled at the waist of the breeches;
And at no time is this ramice of fire cautery a medicine in the place of an iron one, and it is that you take the cautery with a thin knife, and cut the skin of the cushions, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the water is exposed;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce it in the manner as shown, and the eschar to this subtle cautery hot.
And the cut in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything.
And guard that the fire does not touch the eye;
And know that this work is more helpful; And moving guards from the bloodletting and moves that the works of size;
And if no thing makes you contrary, or abscess heals or bloodletting or another thing, so cure that which makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to endure this work for its horror, so administer perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that watery root is there, so make the patient sit upon the raised seat; Then pierce the abscess at the part below to all the spatula wide, and put the perforation through the long of the body;
and let the openings be wide, so that all the water runs out.
then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining water run out, then treat it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you should pour into it a pipe or the instrument used for draining the water from hydrophics, whose shape is described earlier;
and enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled like before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many situations, for which I think it is better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the genitals; and this is by many causes.
That is to say by excess of sour and hot humors which are spread to the genitals, or from blows;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not find pain, and is a grievous abscess;
and by adventure are some grievous abscesses pale and bloody, and of a dark color, and sometimes comes from the outside of an artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
When it is from an artery, then it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it at all.
He who is made of the swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the feeling of the fingers, and one can well do the incision on this semblance, and on the other parts. and is that you cut the root of the cones, then being the egg on top, and the trail from the white this way, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already soldered with these newly formed parts, then it is necessary that you pull out the egg, and cut it.
and if it is in the way of the white, or what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that vein, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the cartilage is or its rear, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your works are accomplished, then use the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then care for it with other cares until it is healed.
This is an abscess enveloped in an envelope resembling the yolk, with the softening of the cones, and the patient moves badly when he goes.
and the cure of this disease is as perilous as the one before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the genitals down to your two hands, over all the vessels which are near the penis, and hold them tight, and stretch them.
then cut with the sharp spatula through the middle of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
then insert an awl where there is the double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came from, and tie it straight to the other end; then cut them in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
then cure the wound like the others where one avoids bowing, so that no vessel spills which nourishes one of the corners;
for by these there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come alive, it is necessary to drain the corners of all the vessels; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be aided.
The happenings of this ramic are thus by the section that comes or is placed there, or by the extension on the belly in the area of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is either where the section is, or from the extension of it, and these two ways of much cause:
or of percussion, or of jump, or of wrestling, or of lifting heavy loads, and similar things.
and the signs when it is of extension of the staff, if they have pock and pock, in long time, and come not suddenly. and are the abscesses even until towards the middle, because the pus comes forward quickly with the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the skin, that it brings at the beginning a sudden pain, and there are diverse appearances of abscesses, under the skin near, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the skin.
And sometimes the intestines are drawn into the wound, and are held in there, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, for which it behoves one to shun.
And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to bring the intestine into its place with his hand within the wound, if it can enter. then be supported on its neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
then extend the heart upward, and cut all the skin of the groin long; then put inside the folds of the waist splints according to what you need to open the wound, and such that the pus may issue forth.
then scrape the pus that is beneath the skin of the groin, until the white pus is uncovered on all sides;
then put your two index fingers into that which follows the groin, where it is between the white pus that is beneath the skin of the buttock and between the second pus, and depart what is behind the buttock and between the second pus;
and then move the hand to the right inside the heart of the coins, and are white siyac in high to your left hand, and lift the egg to all the siyac towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the egg on high, and untie those who are behind the binding;
and  ask at his two if he has any intestine enveloped or white siyac hard, and if you find nothing of that kind, put it in the belly below;
then take a needle which has the thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the rear part of the siyac, which is after the skin of the coins; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the siyac, which we have said is below the skin of the coins, with a strong binding of two parts; then wrap the shoulders with threads, and tie them together from two parts, so that none of the vessels which nourish them can enter within, except that an abscess may not come there. and put the thread directly according to the first thread long two of that one, and after these two threads leave the said space which is below the heart of the bones the large one of a finger. and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears.
then cut in the part which is below the skin of the bones, as much as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before.
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the thread that we have said. And sometimes is cauterized the whites as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of a decrease in blood. For this happens many times, and leave the thread as long as it dries by itself;
and if he delays in healing, so it is to be raised with hot water, and put upon that which we have said, until it heals.
then cure the wound with other cures, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this branch I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below.
then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with those who operate, as long as the vessels bleed;
and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the groin, like we have said, and opens them;
and do not send any of the intestines into the groin, and if any come out, it is bad, and repair immediately;
And nevertheless if it remains too long in this point, it believes the wound or syph, as far as the intestines descend.
And this happens by the extension of the syph which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and swells its parts and opens.
And the cure for this is by cautery, as we have said before.
And at no time is it cured by iron in this manner: And it is that the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture enflamed outward according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the  suface which is beneath the skin that it follows, then take the rait and place it on the apparent place of the suface;
and press it at the end of the belly, then sew the two apparent places of the suface on the head of the rait, and sew the one and the other;
then extract the head of the rait, and do not cut the suface or extend the one nor another thing, as I have made you know in the cure of the root of the intestines; then the cure by the treatment of wounds.
then the cure by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it is defaced and care for the wound, until it is healed.
The suture is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of softening of the skin of the genitals
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it is made to be seen.
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin;
then join the two edges with a suture, and if you see it, first sew the excess of the softened skin to three or four firmly;
then cut between the sutures, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
Through chastisement
Know that this chapter is commonplace in our law, and for this reason I would like that I do not speak of it in this book;
and there are necessary for two manners:
one of which is that the patient in their own words answer when they are asked, and by themselves seek treatment;
and the other, because we often need to fasten certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and oxen and other animals.
Therefore I say that fastening is done in two ways: either by attraction, or by fenestration.
In the one we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water, until the hooves are softened and pliable; then grasping them with your hand, until they are placed back and you no longer feel them.
Of the size fastening: it is fitting that you hold the animal, and press the leather of the hooves with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut above each hoof at the joint, when you have well scraped them;
And I let none prick of the Syriac and the subtle Syriac which is on the vessels;
And this manner of chastisement is more effective than the one done by attraction, because in attraction perhaps nothing remains of the parts, by which the beast desires lust;
then care for the wound until it is healed.
Of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is according to II manners as men: one if it is that between the two sexes appears also as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.
And the other manner is so in women, and about the nipple as well as a staff and they copulate.
And the care of the man and the woman is that you cut all the joined parts, and treat them like other wounds;
in the second manner, men whose urine comes out through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
A pimple is a lump attached on the natural part, so much it is ugly to see And some women have them as large as a hand, and that is their cure.
It is necessary that you squeeze the surplus of the pimple onto your hand or a cloth, and apply it lightly;
and do not squeeze too hard so that bleeding does not come out, then the cure of another cure until it is healed.
And to another lump that is born at the mouth of the groin, and the employee, and by chance if it was hurt, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it in old times “cow disease”. If it is necessary that you cover it, as we have said the tendon, and the care until it is healed.
Erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the hole is small. And is natural by birth, or accident by disease that comes from it.
And is natural by birth, or accident by disease that comes from it. Or it is by the charm of the joint, or by the subtle or thick sinew, and is done from within in the joints, or in the ribs, or underneath, or wherever it may be.
And prevents conception, and childbirth, and by adventure the flowers to have.
And knowledge of these is by the regard of the bailiff.
If the stop is near appearing, then to the two or to the rail.
If it is subtle sinew, and it is near to the two books, then hast thou, and do thus:
Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, legs spread.
Then form the two leaves, as long as the subtle one is rounded, and the stupefaction be over.
Then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and have the woman lie down at home every day, so that she cannot move.
And if the sty is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula seeming like a myrtle leaf.
If the stupefaction is of flesh origin, then suspend it with the string and cut it;
and have the medicines that stanch blood, such as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of egg.
Then administer a band of broad cloth so that the wound cannot close;
and thus it should remain long, and administer to her a tent of dry linen.
then let other cures be done until he is healed.
And when in the marsh comes new clay, then it should be covered in this manner, if it is not abscesses suppurating. For an abscess that is in the flesh one must not touch with fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without court customarily, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tuberous.
and we have said in the division the resemblances of those, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the boils, when they are brought in the marsh, and they do not appear to the touch, unless it is cured by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, those who can be healed.
Therefore it behooves you to place the woman in a cold house, then being the tuberous as tongs, and the cope at its roots, then powder on restraining medicines of blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
then plunge her feet to the air an hour, then put her in cold water;
and if decorremens of blood comes, then let her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galena and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and the confit with honey and aisil, and make an emplastrum on her back.
And if it stays put, it is good. If this does not work, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without striking.
Then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess rests, care for the place with ointment until it is healed.
And that one which is called "albathir" is red and similar to the bitter root, so it should be covered as I have said before. And then care for it until it is healed.
Many ways of abscess come in the flesh, such as cancer and festering abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and more other diseases that I have said in the division.
Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the marshes, which is not like the abscesses that are covered with a boil;
and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is angry at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let him suffer as long as the pain is appeased.
And then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have small seats where he leans, and support his back and bring together his feet to the parts outside the leg;
And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good linen band;
then he brings the tail towards the right side, and there administers the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the channel, so that afterwards comes the form.
and it is necessary that when you see him administering this instrument, that you first put in the tail so as to know the depth of the channel, so that what goes into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the channel with cloths so that the instrument does not harm him;
and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and that he holds the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and one makes it with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, with the spatula clean.
and when the wound is emptied, it is necessary that you put in the wound damp lint in rose oil, or in green dry oil;
and place the lint away from the wound to the edge of the margin, and place outside over the margin and on the knife-sharp clean damp lint in water or mullein be cooked;
then cure after two days of oiling preceding these, as long as it is healed;
and no time raise the margin and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia be cooked; then return to oiling.
And if the wound is put back in the flesh, then you must guard yourself from cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of the birth It is first necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air;
therefore the child must hastily be moved by force therefore know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and is below his head, and the second with him.
and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his belly so that the child comes out quickly.
because when he descends with his head, the second follows him, and is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification.
and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Because it comes never with his feet, and comes by force on the body or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes on his belly, or groin, and is turned by chance on its neck, and by other bad figures.
so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help them.
If the child comes onto its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the one giving birth is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her.
and bring its natural oil or fennel to be boiled, and then put the bail between its thighs with the small spatula whose shape is here: and split the secondine, and cut at its fingernail as long as the moisture which is within corrects;
and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer an enema to the woman with flaxseed mucilage and sesame oil.
Then make her sneeze and cough, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour; then now extract the child.
And if the two hands are dislocated, then it is necessary that you reset them lightly here and there. and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on the chair, and raise her feet up. then tip the chair over to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the tipping;
and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the elbow which was placed before, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes onto its feet, then it is necessary to push upwards. and then turn it here and there, until it is equalized;
then grab its feet and extend them here and there.
When it jumps up to the hips, then command to grasp, and make it sneeze with condition; If it will be so, God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural shape. Therefore, there must be treated lightly.
And if it does not come as we have seen, say that you take mullein of the herb, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put it on the woman's body inside and outward this ointment, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs;
and when she is softened below, say that you make her a collar of frankincense, and put it under, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the stool, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, for the child is now coming out.
of the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, you put your hands on the child, patting it, patting it; Then let him be laid on his back, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on the bed. And bend his hands palm to palm, and then take his hands above his belly, and remove the cushions from under him, until she is prepared downwards; And if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them forcefully, then move his belly upwards, then push with your hands; and poke the child here and there; And instruct the woman to shave herself until the child is born.
of the issue of the child who comes out by a wide hand during It is necessary to devise a way to bring back the hand: If it cannot be brought back, have the woman get up and leave;
If she cannot leave, have her lie on the bed and uncross her legs.
Then administer the concoction that I have recounted;
And if she does not give birth, have her sit on the stool, then study how to bring back the hand. And guide the child according to its natural form, and have her sneeze, and instruct her to shave herself until the child is born.
Of the issue of the child on its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother It is necessary that the midwife hold her hand, then poke it gently here and there,
And when it is even, place on the nature of flesh, a little bit of oil, as we have said, then command her to move a little bit at a time.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to pull herself up. And make her sneeze. of this same manner to all of the spine
of this same manner to all of the spine When it comes to being in this manner throughout the whole shoulder, strike the shoulder with your finger, until all moisture is gone.
and if the child falls onto its face and neck, so that the head is not held up, the child will die.
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to abstain from any movement:
of the separation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and rarely three or four. and this is not a strange thing, but it happens. Two are a strange thing, and rarely live, if they even name them;
Two are a strange thing, and rarely live, if they even name them; I know that they are multiplied, and their severance is by the force which divides them, which is attached to the head;
and sometimes they come out as naturally as one under, as we have said.
And if they come out painfully, then treat them as we have said, and let the surgeon be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does. and do so that it may lead to health. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the marsh I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of its sage glorious, and it is necessary that the surgeon know all this, because by chance similar things happen; if he does according to what is fitting.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death.
so it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised.
and the minister holds her from the sides, or she is tied to the bed so that she does not move during the descent of the child.
then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils with muskmallow and fennel and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and ointments.
then put them in the mother gently, then guide her where she puts the forceps so that they are suitable to it, and take care if the child is appearing that he descends upon his head.
so put the forceps in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or on her palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is on feet, so put it or prickle them at the middle ribs.
and it is necessary that he hold the awl in his right hand, and put the curve between the two fingers of the left hand, and thrust it with all his hand lightly, and stick the awl in any one of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty place;
then stick it against the other awl, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
and then put them equally in moving from one side to the other, so that it moves easily, and let the awls be toothed to hold well, as this is the form:
And if one part remains, anoint the bail with some oil in his fingers, and thrust them into that part, and draw the other part;
and if there remains none of it, put this one or higher up its place, and do so until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you must envelop it on the cloth, until it comes out completely. then cover it at the joint of the foot or on the knife, and thus you must do in the other hand, and as with II feet.
And if the child's shoulder is large and it is stuck in its exit, or if it has a sharp point assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the point; or you can use the instrument that is called "almidach", because its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one;
and so likewise do if the child has a large head naturally;
and then pull the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps back and it is forced, so they are split, until the moisture which is there or worse comes out;
and if it cannot exit, so cut it in pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the addressing to the mouth of the shaft is light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or at the breast, then it is necessary that you extract it with the hand enveloped in cloth; and scrape the belly or the breast, until the moisture inside flows out;
and if the other members are dislocated, and the head remains, then put the hand of the one who is performing it in their mouth, and pull it until the mouth of the skull. then he puts [it] back in one place or two, and the flesh heals.
and if the mouth of the abscess is contracted because of the hot cautery that has come upon it, it does not need to be worked on, but rather one should administer moist and fatty things. and [he] administers poultices, and wets with softening and moisturizing liquid.
And if the bone is on its rib, and you can put it straight, administer what we have said about a living child;
and if one cannot do that, then the flesh heals in pieces, and leave nothing of the second bone.
And when you have done this, if it comes to an abscess or a boil that is in the flesh;
and if bleeding occurs, it should be put into restraining liquid, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and refused to give birth to the other. After long time there came an abscess in the buttock, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to great purulence.
I was called to heal, and I thought long about it, and could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it emerged one bone, and after some days another. I was greatly astonished because this belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I treated the wound, and in my hands bones, until the woman was better. and I kept the woman long times thus, and it returned a little bit of strength from her.
and I have recorded this chapter for those who, when they find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.
Here after comes the form of the pressor, as it is written in the books;
and to its turns as it has the shoulders of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be so wide, and the edge of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half; and among the two limbs be two adjustments of this same joint, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a bit more;
and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the furrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, somewhat more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers; and have at its two ends two adjustments, as you see, of one palm long and two in width.
and when you see to open the womb with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, the feet apart and the legs open, then put the two instruments adjusted together in the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the womb, until the patient does what she wants.
This instrument are all superimposed, and are multiplied their appearances; and when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much is more Hastings the work, and higher the men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument, so long as it is well equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is held back in childbirth, so it behooves that you command the patient that she retain her breath, and then make her sneeze of condiment, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose; and if it jumps for this, well is.
If this does not happen, take a pot, and make it pierced or covered, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassoligine and centaury; all these herbs, or any one of them, should be cooked or put in water on the fire;
then put a chain or pierced pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh, and keep it there until the vapors come out inside the marsh;
Then make him sneeze, as we have said. If you jump the second joint violently.
And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more force, command the midwife to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in a poultice of alum, and then put it into the vagina, and stir the second time. And when she has found it, seize it and extend it piece by piece straightly, so that the veins do not break during extraction.
but then it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled. if it comes and dislocates again.
And if the mouth of the mare is narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs.
and if it is not of all that we have said, then guard that you do not use the milk;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mare, you bind it to the hip of the woman, then clysterize with ointment tetra-pharmacon. so she will bear and put back, and come again;
but nonetheless, when she bears, if it comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and pales the patient. So then it is necessary fumigations suitable for those:
None of the ancients have tested the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument for which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the second is this:
And it is like the appearance of a dog, and it sets the head subtly in nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire;
And let the fumigation be above the coals, and the tinder until it is burned out, and begin another one.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but are stopped with subtle instruments. Therefore it is fitting for the midwife that she pierce that instrument in its proper place and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guards the bandage so that it does not touch it;
Then she puts on linen moistened in wine and oil, then the ointment treatment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not reset, put in a splint of wood, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
And no time comes this stopping from a sudden wound or abscess if it is necessary to cover it tightly if so cured, as we have said of the chain of plomb.
Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodules, and greater than those that come near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
and when that nodule is old, if it works, and still moisture causes blisters or subtle bows, and sometimes these fistulas are pierced.
and they are known by those who have it or by the emission or windiness when the patient makes an emission, and by chance one jumps forward.
And if there are fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the half of the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to the outside of the buttock.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing to the base, and not piercing. And that you insert your index finger or base, and thrust a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then you insert a tent of fine cloth or horse hair, as long as you feel the tent or hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge coming through nor windiness nor pus, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce. If you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urinary tract, then the urine leaks out, and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to its place. If there is no twisting and the pain of inflammation is in the middle, then it is that there is a boil, and it does not require ointment or treatment.
And in these fistulas Persians have no cure except labor, and vanity of the fools who meddle with them.
In those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips inclined to his belly; then put an arrow tent or of lead if there is twisting, as long as you know where the boil comes from.
If the patient feels it near the foundation, then you must put your index finger there, and then feel if he can perceive it.
And be discovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then you know that she is present. If it does not work and one cannot heal her.
It is said nonetheless that one can heal them well, but this happens rarely.
And the aid that one does to it, is if one heats the subtle cautery according to the wideness of the fistula, as it has been said before. And puts it whole hot into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation. And do this two or three times, as long as you know that these fleshy strands are burned, which are seeming to an eye feather.
And then the cure of moist cloths in butter, until that flesh is issued, then the cure of ointment closing and joining flesh.
If it is thus healthy, then well.
If this, otherwise cannot be healed;
And if the tent enters, and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or  syfac, and you see the fistula at this following the covering of the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push ahead before the tent, and then the cautery after, until it comes to the head of the tent. And will be delivered the tent, and will seek out;
Then  examine those ones that seem like a feather of an owl, and remain nothing from them.
And if the wound gets worse, and goes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery assembles II good things: that is to say, the burning of these joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure of tents moistened in butter or in crushed things, as long as the wounds are low and if the joined ones have burned to the bottom.
Then  cure the wound of sudden swellings by means of hard joined things, and they are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the very bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should probe its opening and examine it carefully.
If you feel the tent, and between II there is the cloth or the  syfac or joined things, or where it is near to breaking through, if there is no other way than a path of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the III manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put a tent and cure it as before;
and do not go too deep in cutting, so that you do not cut the base which holds the foundation, and let the secretions come by its natural will; then cure it as we have said.
then cure it as we have said. by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound since it is cut near its foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument; then cleanse the foul matter which is in the wound, as much as you can. then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation:
then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation: so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is or cost by the foundation against the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And he puts the thread twisted in it, and puts the tent to all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is placed in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that one pierced, as you put your dough or foundation;
and carry the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and bind them to each other, and leave it one day or two;
and restrain it no longer until the threads catch these characters which are between two, and shrink;
then cure the wound until it is soldered and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded. For it is not right to make a ligature cover so when it is made, and then cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very much a one part and trenching; and on the other hand no, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhages are according to II manners: or they are inside the foundation, as much as a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short close blood, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
but those that are outside have little moisture, and in short one or a little bit of water clear or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch for them to go in rooms, as long as the foundations are sore, and they appear the children; If you hurry, and can hold it with pincers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots.
And if the forceps cannot hold it because of its moisture, then take it with a cloth, or with cotton, or with a piece of felt. And hold it with your fingers, then cut it, and put hot powders above it in place of cautery; or you cauterize it as is said in the chapter on cautery, then cure it with other cures until it is healed;
And if the base cannot come out, then enema the patient with a harsh and biting enema to wash what is in the base so that it can come out openly; But if the patient resists, and if the threads are too thick from the base, then the cure is light;
But if the patient resists, and if the threads are too thick from the base, then the cure is light; And it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron. If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner:
If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: Take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then lead the thread above and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and so be wide;
And tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one open to correct the superfluity of blood;
Then put on the foundation a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until they weep, and when they are dry, care for them with ointment and other remedies until they are healed.
of drying of the veins or foundation Many times there happens drying of humors in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works there. It is necessary that you cauterize the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above it, so that it does not get moist. Then care for it until it is healed as necessary.
And if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and is well-scraped. Then care for it until it is healed.
from shaking A formice is a small appearance of pus before the body, and it goes very deep;
And sometimes it is found cold, and one feels it like death from chill, and it comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than any other part.
And the cure is that you take a cane of an ostrich feather, or a very strong vulture feather, and put that cane on the wound, until the purple circles tinge the wound all around. then turn your hand over the entire cane until you cover the whole wound, and place it in place, and scrape the wound from its roots.
And if you see, so do this of a serpent of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above: Do not let it pierce, for to hold at the joint, and press.
And if you see, then cauterize the wound, as it is in front or chapter of cautery.
At times one does a clyster of silver or lead, or molten iron or mesh;
and at times one does these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. Those therefore who are administered to in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Those therefore who are administered to in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the clyster small and great is above wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
And there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside.
And on one of the ribs II is pierced, and on the other I;
And the belly is where one puts medicines in a bladder of animal or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be some space, then put into these holes I thread strong thread twisted in X or however around, and assemble the belly like a kid; And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with strong thread, then administer an enema;
And this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then put it in gently; then the minister with his two hands together, until it is all visible, then remove the blister, and raise the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to pass, then pull on the skin as much as he can and if he sleeps a whole night flat, then it is more help.
And if you treat it with a disorder of the belly and the medicine hastily issues from there, repeat it until it is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be stretched:
We have already said in the division the cure of wounds;
or we will tell you the cures for hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the blow of a stone, and the cut of a sword and knife, or of a spear or club or arrow, or similar things;
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, for remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is immediately torn and the wound is large, and you doubt strongly of an abscess hot: if it should happen to be bled promptly from the cephalic vein even if there is a little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the contrary side of the wounded part;
and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and thick meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let him lessen his meat, and drink no wine, nor eat much of meat.
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in ptisana wine.
and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
and if the artist has moved it, put some ointment on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then bring them together by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is open to the bone, and hanging, and only holds by a bit, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore tough flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats such as beef and wheat bread, as well as pulses, and similar things.
And if you find rotten skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw away the pus, then cure it;
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put in this powder which joins as if the fire had healed it.
And the manner of the powder is: Take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; Quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
and then dress it well, and leave it undisturbed, if it does not swell; for one removes the medicine only when it is healed.
And no times is this done with just chalks, when one does not have incense nor the blood of dragon, but that the fire has closed the wound.
And if the fire has already healed the wound, even if it is still inflamed, put no powder in it;
but put some dressings digested, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it swells. then treat other wounds until it is healed.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers.
and I will tell you afterwards about fractures of the head.
Of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this one and the other of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is a nerve, there is no other thing to do but leave the wound alone and put nothing in to restrain it, for it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat. And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as calf washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cuckoo's flower also washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist dressings.
And if the wound is large, so the side and tie with bandages, then care until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is swollen and full of pus, pierce or lower than that.
And if the artery is cut and bleeding comes, then stop it with a ligature, and bandage it, and cauterize it as is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the windpipe and the conduit is kept, so that the flesh goes, stitch the heart on top of the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. And then restrain it properly, and leave it for some days, then cure it with medicinal ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cover it. And if there are pieces of bone, then try to remove all of them as best you can, and what you cannot have, leave it until the wound is rotten, and be careful and apply a splint.
And if the wound is fresh, then powder on top of the powder that I said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look if from the wound there arises windiness as the patient breathes: Then know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain deep, and return to the heart, and kill the patient. But put attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day:
And if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if there come not spasms, nor evil trembling of heart nor straining of the arm; and when you see the good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat therefore with tents and other treatments, as long as it is sound;
and if it cannot heal, and works, then you know that there is a fistula;
treat it as one must. And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then treat it as above. If it is large, sew it together;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has broken pieces, then close the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are loose. And if they are not removed, let the wound fester, so it will lighten the extractions.
And for other wounds on other members, judgment is made as we have said.
of the displacement of the belly
The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small;
From the large wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines protrude, so by which the intrusion of others occurs;
And the suture is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, for that reason it is put back in more carefully, if one does not put them in hot to hot.
Because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they go back in more carefully, and for that reason the middle wound is worse, for that reason one must reset the intestine to its place like the others.
And know that a rupture of the belly is according to IV manners.
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of the other wounds of the body and two other special sutures are common to other wounds.
And nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has come out, and it is a thing to be put back together, this is by one of the two manners. or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Half an sponge or I soft cloth in boiling water only, or you cook it in boiling water adding juniper and pepper, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed.
And sometimes this wind restraining is done, and it moves only so that it deflates.
And when you see the swelling departing, moisten the intestine with water or wine and herbs be cooked, because by these is aligned the entrance to little things.
And if it cannot enter, make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are treated.
And the first cure is to move it that it be cut, that one should not cut it without great necessity being there.
And this is the instrument for splitting it.
So cut inward at the curve and outward not, and see here the form. And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out, put them back in their natural form in their proper place if you are able, for this is valuable to heal.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, it behooves you that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head. and if it is in the part below the belly, place the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, put your attention to that the sunken part be higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds put what you have appeared, then have between your hands the minister pitiful who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips;
and this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound one part of space, and there pierce a needle where there is the good strong thread; and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the fascia, which is below the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two heads of the fascia the four together;
then the strain of a double thread around the needle of one part, then assembles the two ends of the wound together, and then leaves the space of two fingers, and there it puts another needle;
then the thread of the needle like you have done the first one, and do not cease doing so according to what you need the needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: for this reason it is necessary that they are medium-sized;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture;
and then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths on the ends of the needles for them to remain in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this way of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two are used there.
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of the fascia together with a needle through which passes a strong medium thread.
And when you have pierced these four pieces together, you move the needle back to where you began, in the manner one sews fabrics.
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a man's finger.
This stitch belongs to a man, and I sutured a wound that one man had on his belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and it protruded from the intestines well two palms in size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I brought back the intestine after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I cured him, and he was healthy.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in the place where one could not find any, nor any medicine; and I put more than twice a day fresh cotton on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and thrust it from the outside part to the inside.
When it has pierced the right heart straight through, then lay the head on the side of the scalp where you thrust the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside.
And the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave the scalp on one side, and take it back on the other, until the suture is entirely completed.
The second manner of suturing, as Galens states properly, is like any one who joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one side of the scalp to the other side, in such a way:
Insert a needle or head of the scalpel near it, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two sides of the scalp. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part until the inside one, just like two shoulders.
Then make it pierce both from the outside part until the inside one, in two other shoulders of the miracle that are on the other side.
And this is the most common and usual way to suture.
The Gauls say this word thus, and no one testifies it, it is necessary to sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each.
And one must thrust one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than in the other parts of the belly.
The judgements of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the artery has moved, then put back the intestine and sew it up.
then put on powder of ginger and if the artery has been moved, put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound weeps. and sew up the threads, and let the sides be joined together, and the stitch. then treat the wound like the others, until it is healed.
and if you do not have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to weep, old cotton, and move it two times a day until it is healed.
Because you do not need other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound does not make connection with the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a linen cloth lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the buttocks.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in his bowels, and this happens many times, then administer enemas of black wine, and even if the putrefaction comes to the intestine.
And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is pierced, and this is because of the proximity of the veins, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the approximation of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps out of the wound, put it back in as if it were the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has become maggot-ridden or black, then you must tie the place that is black, so that no bleeding comes from there, because there are veins and arteries.
then cut that which is between the ligaments, and place the two heads during from below the wound to outside in order to align the extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the bowel
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some people, because I saw that one man was pierced or belly of a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and became a fistula, and through it came excrement and flatulence;
I put it under treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to sweat until it was healed, and the ends were closed.
And when I saw it closing, I doubted that the patient would have ill in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner: take strips of cloth with large threads, then assemble the edges of the wound, and when the strip covers the mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it pulls its mouth upwards;
and then cover the head with cloth, so that it cannot be untied, then put another strip after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely enclosed; and sew the wound.
This method is used for wounds in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very smooth, and then tie it to the head of a fine linen thread twisted together, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the opening;
and this manner of stitching with threads is not against the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the lower intestines, there is nothing to be done except subtlety;
of fistula wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and also when it is healed and turned inwards.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white node which one does not feel pain in, and is also shaped like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and thin, and other times thick. sometimes small, and other times quite large;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, it is only by one of the IX causes: that is to say, because of the little blood or flesh; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to be born; or where there is too much bulge; or where the wound is poor, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is of a pestilential manner; or because the property in the region is slow to digestion, and late to healing, and inflated by nature; or where there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or it is necessary for me to tell you the cure of a fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet. and if there is one that comes to the property of the main limb, and similar parts.
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only toil and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula that does not come up to where I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you will.
And if the fistula is crooked, then make a circle of a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends easily to the twists and turns.
and if the fistula is opened by hand and you cannot easily search it with tents, then clench it through one of the openings, because moisture flows from one opening to another, and cleanses it.
then carefully probe with your power that you know if there are bones or nerves, and whether it is covered by membrane, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing your hand, and where he feels it.
and when you will truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the pus and corrupted matter that are inside;
and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut into it as much as you can, then put moistened tents in a medicinal ointment, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is at the bottom;
and then he puts ointment for healing flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away.
If a vein or nerve does not affect the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then  scrape it as long as all the corruption is removed, then treat with healing things as long as it is healed;
and if it is not healed, and returns like before, know that you have not gone as far as should be done;
If it is open and you wish as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, it is well. If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is nothing else but to leave it to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with tweezers, then extract it with the instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, extract them all, leaving none.
and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut and remove both moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put on the wound something preventing rot, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then set only so much as the corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound.
and if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes right up to the flesh of the bone; then it is necessary to be and cut all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.
and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to the man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and help in your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for opening;
but the wounds by their folly work so much that the abscesses open and they corrupt much of matter, and become fistula, and there came much pus that all lying bowed and moist from the body;
and many wounds they did care for over II years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I came to them called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what corrupted by pus to great corruption; and becoming red the body of the youth, and had a color of citron.
I set up a tent in one of these pits, and then searched all the pits, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hastened, and dug into one of the pits until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inside bone.
I was certain that what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except that which I had removed;
and began to restore the wound with hot medicinal poultices for a long time, and could not heal it;
And then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then tried to solder the place; but I could not heal until I dug around a palm's breadth of the bone, and found it entirely rotten. Then I restored it with medicines; And he was healed and joined soundly, and it did not again become necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but it was cured completely, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and it was well-disposed and did not have any inconvenience or contrary at all, neither going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it should be treated in this manner: Take a linen cloth and strain it at the head of the bone that is open, and command any one to extend it upwards. And put another linen cloth, thicker than the first one, and tie it over the skin that is above the bone, and extend the head upwards so that you pull the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh in the place where you wish to be, so that the bone does not bleach the flesh;
and put a piece of wood or a board under the bone so as to completely cover the corrupted flesh.
and it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to treat again other times.
And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely.
then put the charcoal underneath, and then take it from one part to the other of the corruption, and be the ligature of the long end of the corruption by a point, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and be the bone where it contains on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to cut.
and if the corruption is or in the finger of the hand, or or in the finger of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corruption, how it opens to you. and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not hinder you.
and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each kind of work with its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases. so consider the instrument which you need according to this.
The shoulder can be dislocated by means of internal or external causes;
and when you will have medicated that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes through this from death, or from malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb.
And the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems that it is burned by fire, and after the blackness, then comes the corrosion of limb to limb, and takes hold throughout the body;
If you hasten to cut it, and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the thigh, then cut it off, and do not give him any space to come until his hand.
And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow.
And if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy left except the quantity of its virtue;
and so do all this when the corrosion comes or pit: if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes at a pit, then cut all the pit; and if it rises in the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to death.
and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister to one of the bonds below, and another minister to the other bond above, and you sever the flesh which is between the two bonds at a spatula wide, as far as the bone is uncovered;
then cut or saw, and put on each side the drapery of linen so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess chaus.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place diligently, or put on some restraining powders;
then return to your medicine until it is completed, then tie the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed;
And I shall tell you that it happened to a man in his foot:
He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his heel of his foot, until it consumed the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover his foot, and was healed;
and long after that the corrosion returned in his heel of his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things to counteract it after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
and it would be that I might grasp his hand, and I do not want, that I have hope of rejoining the matter; and I doubt also that if I cut his hand, he would not die, because the virtue of man was weak;
and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have this story related only for that reason if one needs it to do otherwise.
Sometimes an abscess comes in its fleshy place, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and pierces, and out comes the pus, and remains in its place like a vessel; and the skin that is above it is also as subtle as fine linen, and does not break until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone by force, it is called "fistula";
and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thin, like a cloth; and do not let it be treated for its corruption.
And if you are convinced that the skin is hardening and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it with a clyster like this:
look if the chest is large and the part inside it has a foul smell, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: Take equal amounts of ashes, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in sharp and honey, and in a clyster the breast, and restrain the wound; and let the medicine stay in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
do this many times, until the breasts are softened and the pain is gone;
and at no time is it clystered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes from vine wood and pour water over them, then let it drain, and in the clyster until you know that the breasts are well softened.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey or where there is a pinch of litharge ground. or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes it breathe.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the bowels are well purified, then cleanse it with what causes stool to emerge from them, and make a plaster of diaphinite, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of ointments;
and if the opening of the chest is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, enlarge it with an iron a little, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, until it is enlarged.
and if the wound is too wide, so let it be left only as much as the clyster can enter, and if the opening that lies above is lower, so cover or raise it as high as it is.
And if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, so arrange it in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest point where it is, for when the bowel is in place, let no flesh enter and if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, so arrange it in such a manner: That the bowel move gently down, and leave nothing of the bowel.
That the bowel move gently down, and leave nothing of the bowel. And take consolidating medicines to put on the healthy part, and be on the linen sheet that covers the whole wound. Then cope as forces to the opening of the breast which is more wide than the first, then ointment be put on the other sheet according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the wound of the healthy part to align the bowel, and do not remove the large sheet outside except after many days once.
And he who is on the opening of the breast, often remove to remove the bowel, and know what runs from the bowel, if it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested.
And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when the medicine is in such a manner extended and you see nature that rises on the wound of the healthy part, then know that the breasts are now healing, and approaching health.
and then you untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, if it does not make you despair of health, for the cure is approaching.
For there are men who delay healing of flesh in their wounds, and some that do the opposite.
and he bows indigestion from his chest after many days, knowing that the breast does not heal.
and if the breast is slow to heal and is pulled away, he applies medicines drying moisture in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment diaconite, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy.
take ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance.
then boil it and use it.
And that same thing is best cooked with honey, when the definition of an offering isn't present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey while it is over the fire.
And then in a cloth you wrap it, and the one placed over the chest, and sometimes it administers an aristolochia long, and roots of lilies celestial, which is also like flour of beans and centaury. And in use of simple or of composites: Grind them, and make powder of it, and put on the honey that I said, and use it;
And if the cure is prolonged, and isn't cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs; if the care of the fistula, as we have said before.
Panacea is an abscess that arises from under the knuckle of the hand, or the foot, or perhaps arises in other places.
and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then the abscess comes forth, and runs and hollows out a furrow until it runs to the root of the knuckle, and perhaps runs the whole way through.
and the corruption comes to the bone, so that there is fetid pain, and the joint of the limb becomes wide, and the color is foul.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity which is remaining from the bone, then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the knuckle is healthy;
and if the knuckle after the flesh heals, and it begins to prick, and to blush, then it is necessary that you put the root under the knuckle that pricks, and drive it upward, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly, and put upon the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive in order to remove all. then the care of dressings until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and treat it, because as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal.
And if you see the two [bones] corrode, cut them in one as it was said before, then the care until it is healed.
and if it is broken and bruised, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it;
then cut the [bone] with a sharp spatula by cutting across above, and guard that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the bone, because the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us of the two.
One who is born in any knot of the two does not move, and one who is born at the joint of the two, perhaps moves;
The size of one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is hard to cure: if you hold him down to cover.
In the one who is born or must at the back of our, it is fitting that you cut first the flesh roundabout until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable length for him, then cure it until it is healed.
The blows that come to two joined together come by birth, or by binding of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you cover that suture so that it may heal according to its natural forms; then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of fine lead until the skin is joined, as it befits.
If it happens to come together with the palm of any of its hands, bind that suture as is fitting.
Veins are thick enclosures full of melancholic superfluities that come into many limbs of the body;
and they more often happen in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him once purging of col, and then the health of the basilica.
The cure of iron is according to II manners: one is that they are cut open, and blood is drawn out black. and the other manner is that you cut open the vein and drain it completely.
The cutting is done in this manner: First, the leg is immersed in very hot water, until the large vein is soft, then the leg of the patient is strained from above the hip to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in this place, or in II or in III, with a wide blade, then empty and completely drain the black blood from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the illness can withstand;
And then to the wound, and command him to apply a poultice of black pitch.
And resume bleeding and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harming the patient.
The elevation of this is according to this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cut the place of the vein from the top of the knee, or in the part below to the ankle;
then open the skin with an instrument, and scarify the vein on both sides, until it appears when you touch it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord;
Then put the razor underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then place it lightly on the incision, then cut into the other place above III times.
Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the point, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you did first.
Then cut another piece, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the point of the foot, then scrape and lift until the second incision.
Then extract it piece by piece, until it is all pulled out, then cut.
And if you cannot scrape and lift it, then insert a needle into the whole thread strong and doubled, and tie and scrape it, and insert it below the razor, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is pulled out. And guard that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it comes to a nuisance for the patient.
And when you have treated it fully, put on top of the wound's place wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and enclosed together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it twistedly, but do not break it; and treat it as we have said before.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is established in legs, in hot parts where it does not grow herbs nor tree, and in earth where there is no moisture;
And by chance it may be born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes under the skin, as it comes inside the body serpent and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then it changes its color, and the vein begins to burst forth, as if a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two fingers, and tie it, and leave the plank on the leg, and every time he is in pain outside, then wrap again around the plank, and tie it.
and if it is too long, then cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely out. because if you cut it, then it goes back into the flesh, and brings an abscess and rot there, and bad disease.
Therefore for this reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and that nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of long, or of X, and one fellow came to me once, whose vein was X palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out I rays or threads, and pierces it to the bottom so that all in goes;
And let it be emptied of the material which is inside, and administer to its place medicines preventing corruption any day, then cure it as the abscesses.
And sometimes in this vein many rains, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes much of threads, and from which it leaps rains;
Cure then as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "disease of ox" because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes all over the body going up and down, and it is felt well at the turn of limb to limb, until they reach the skin where it goes, and leaps forth;
and is endangered by putrefaction of some humors, such as come worms and vermin and ascarides in the belly;
and one doubts of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and milked, then one cannot help but when it goes:
so it behoves you to tie the place above and below with a strong ligature tightly, then cut above and milk out the pus, and if the worm is driven deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold under it a formed eyebrow then cut above, and drive the treatment.
and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicine soluble for the bad humors corrupted, and avoid from meats causing rot.
of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called in our land "vakir," and is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
and I see what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and discovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and I after, saw it rise as well as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if alive silver when it cuts from its place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder, and then a little after it corrodes throughout the body, until she came to the other arm;
then she told me that she was turning around her body, as I saw her.
I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner. Nevertheless, I wanted it that they might move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it so, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that it was for this reason that the woman had a dry body, and her veins uncovered, and for this appeared that constrained windiness.
and did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins covered.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then lay it above and below carefully, and then cut up until that constrained windiness from its place emerges. and cauterize the place.
And if you do not see it with your eyes, cure it with those who treat the wind ailments, such as fetid pills and pills of serpent and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and soldered. And of those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces;
And those which fall in any member they fall according to two manners: or in the principal member such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you: then it is necessary that you refrain from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases. and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not entirely in place, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the syvface which is above the brain, is when scotomy and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of mucus; and perhaps it is without a furor from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps it loses the speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moisture white seeming to poultice, and leaps also as bruise of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not in place.
The sign of the seven when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seven moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood comes, and cold sweat, and syncope: Know then without doubt that death is coming.
And the sign of the arrow that does not come out is that without plains of foam jumping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and sighs high and seeks the cold air.
And if the seven falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs; and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and it moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls or stomach, perchance it leaps from the wound any thing of the undigested flesh.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and in a no point of fiber by the intestine route, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the seven falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: Know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the arms and necks and throat and shoulder and helper and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that you may do otherwise.
It happened to a man with an arrow in the root of his nose: I tried it, and pulled it from another side under the ear fat, and he was healed without feeling much pain.
And  I pulled out an arrow that had stuck in the fat of the eye under the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow,  all light iron without ears.
The man was healed, and he suffered no bad consequences.
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I softened its barbs, and carefully pulled it out until I reached the end, and the Christian was healed.
And treat an arrow to the man, who was wounded in the chest or belly, and thought he would die;
and then that after passing XXX days, his condition did not improve; I cut above the arrow and extracted it, and treated him further, and there was no bad outcome.
And if you see the man who had an arrow strike his back, and the wound closed above;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change his natural disposition, nor finds inconvenience in any of his natural works.
And if you see another man who had an arrow strike his face, and the wound closed; and remains so without suffering much pain;
and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow to the man of the princes the king, who was wounded in his side, and was slightly declining on the right side; and the arrow was entirely pulled out.
I was called to care for him after three days had passed. If I found the wound very narrow.
I took hold of it with all my skill, and felt nothing at all. And he felt pricking and pain below his right ear.
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put a plaster of soothing and digestive herbs on top, because the ears did not swell. and the ears of the arrow appeared.
and the ears of the arrow appeared. I put the plaster on again for a few days, and it closed the wound directly, and the patient stayed like that for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
and he told me so. I put on the wound a caustic medication for a few days until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which was hardening in place.
then I placed in the opening of the wound by that medicine sharp, as long as the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it pierced well the ends for IV months, and then I widened so the wound that I put in pliers, and my on one side and the other, and it could not escape;
therefore I did not cease to refine and devise ways of instruments, until I took on the day pliers well made, according to those that its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it, and restored the wound.
And the wise judges that cartilage of the nose cannot restore: I therefore restored it, and the wound was joined, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those that I do not say, for the books cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters compare to a great thing, and to those that are present and failing, find new work, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that the arrows are not from members where they are fixed further than according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that one which is further by the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into their flesh, and never has been any other time.
And if it does not now exit, let it remain as long as the flesh is pulled inwards and the exit is loosened;
and also if it is fixed in the bone and cannot exit, let it remain so for some days, and move it each day;
and therefore she leaps, and if she does not leap, then pierce around the entire forest subtly, until the forest around is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is lodged in the body and cannot be seen, then search for it with all your might; And if you feel it, then treat it with a suitable instrument.
And if you cannot by the stretching of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then cut as much as the wound is large.
And treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to which it is attached, remove the flesh that is stuck on either side as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out.
And be careful that you do not break the arrow, but that you pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, then let him lay until his leg is soft, then treat it, because the extraction is painful. And if the flow of blood opposes you, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
And guard against the incision of the nerve and vein, and put everything as much as you can to pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
and set the patient according to the form that it was when the arrow struck it, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do so, put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where one sees or feels nothing apparent, or the skin is swollen in place:
cut then below, as much as the tongs can take, and then extract it: if it jumps out now.
And if it is held within the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then treat it.
And if it cannot be extracted, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if the shaft of the arrow is in there, put out the whole shaft;
and if the shaft has broken off, and you see administer pounding, you administer the instrument so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument:
and then thrust forward, and if the arrow is broken, put the pointed instrument inside, to ease extraction.
And if the wound is surrounded, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as it is proper.
And if the arrow lies in the thigh or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it, then cut it.
and keep from cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary. and tend to the wound until it is healed.
The form of pliers used to treat arrows resembles an eye's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways of doing this: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the pointed arrow is like the feather of a bird, to put at the tip of the shaft, as this is the shape:
There are thirty-one veins from which one heals, so it has sixteen heads, that is to say: two bats behind the ears, which are called the two "herbes"; and the two arteries which are in the two temples appear; and the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the back of the neck; and the two veins that are in the throat; and the two veins that are in the upper lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins of which one commonly finds five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and is from the inner side of the elbow, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fascia" and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is where the right rib is, and they call it by the common people "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossil, and it is the one that we drain, which opens clearly above the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and there are two of them.
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch of the left rib, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle of the right rib. and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Draining the veins that are after the ears helps with old cataracts and migraines.
and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth. then tighten the patient's neck to a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their places depending on the head. then where you feel your pulse below your shoulder, feel for it there too.
then take the lancet and thrust it below the vein to the bone, then raise your hand over the entire vein above, and cut through the skin and vein well at their intersection, and let blood flow out as much as you see.
then strain and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The bloodletting of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for old migraine, and sudden, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of the eyes' sharp tears.
and the qualities of bloodletting are as I say: And that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below his ear, and then he should direct (the bloodletting);
Then raise the heart above the vein on high with your index finger, and thrust the lancet beneath, and lift the vein upward, and cut it, as you have done with other veins, and make correction of blood according to your need.
Then untie the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then the scab forms, and let it remain until it is healed.
and we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The blood from the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the blood from the cephalic vein for old facial ailments, and migraines, and redness;
and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "digger," whose form is:
And place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and never do the work with a wide flame.
Nevertheless, it does not behoove for the flames to be too strong. and the healthy tissue be scorched, because the bone is near and by chance the flames break when they are subtle.
The healthy tissue of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps the eyes, and the head, and the throat, and the root in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their healthy tissue are that the patient strains their neck by twisting from any linen, as before;
then the healthy tissue, and whether it be the healthy tissue through the traverse, a little of the long of the flame a little wide, because there is no flesh. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break.
Then make a cut of blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cloth, and tie it well.
The blood of the vein of the arm is good for fever and for sore throat, and for diseases of the face, like migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old.
and the qualities of the blood is that the patient constricts his neck, then draws his arm to his left hand, and takes a fine long thread, and puts it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not let it go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the two armpits helps with the easing of the breast, and for inflammation, and for many diseases, and for gangrene, and for corrosions, and for herpetic ulcers,
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient restrains their neck below on both sides, as we have said.
and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein in the long place a little widely, then draw out blood moderately, or as much is needed.
then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and restrain both veins moderately so that the patient doesn't strangle. and leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed.
of the veins of the books The blood of the veins above the lips helps in healing wounds inside the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and to sores and inflammation.
And the qualities of the vein are to make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain their neck as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side, and recognize them because they are black, and because around them are small black veins.
Therefore one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so cut the largest of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
from the vein under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic, and it is at the stricture of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth.
And the qualities of the bleeder is that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein:
Therefore bleed one and the other, and do not go too far into them, because below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which we commonly bleed are bled according to two manners:
or they prick at all flame martin broad, or olive subtle as you hear trenching, and it is called "ancil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and the narrowing of the veins. The form of the flame martin is very well known, and it is wide as you see.
And it is necessary for opening the deep veins plain of thick blood appearing, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
And it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so aids the sicknesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly;
and it is necessary for the lancet to cut wisely, and that he avoid the artery which is below. And if it cuts the artery, and a torrent of blood comes, then it must be stopped as I have said; And the flame must not be pricking but cutting like a knife.
And if the basil doesn't open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it and change another. or you wish no vein of it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly. And the cup to the knife like we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary thus that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the knife. And guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is of the artery. Then follows.
And if you see it rise up also like the urine of a child, and its color is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and place your hand lengthwise on top of it, then remove your hand if the flow stops, which often happens; if the arm is bleeding, and let it be so, and do not move it for the patient;
and be wary, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the flow does not stop, and it is bothering you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the retraction; and stop the blood flow.
And take a strip of licorice, and make it, and take one of the halves and tie it well up to the other day.
If the skin is stretched, it is good. If not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stretch the skin.
And the stretching is not grieved in more positions for the small place of the wound, and the possession of the arm's bond.
The vein in the middle helps so much that it treats blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said.
And it befits the surgeon that he place himself near the nerve which is below, and if he does not go too deep, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the wounds are grazed, and perhaps cannot heal;
And this nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then you must clean it with the anointing instrument. And push the nerve to your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
The cephalic vein's draining helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
And it is necessary to drain by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because that one is the most safe of all veins, for it does not have a nerve nor artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter spot, and do not grieve if one must try the first time, and one tries again. And by adventure it swells the eyes in some men, as soon as one tries the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.
The first thing you should know about healing, is that bleeding is administered only to preserve health, and to avoid future diseases.
And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are or cotte: that is to say, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; And one must bleed at the beginning of Lent, in spring and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one must bleed the first day or third day, after two hours or three days.
Bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of the day or of the night, at all hours and in all times.
and it is not fitting to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying for more than the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed those who have passed sixty years old.
And when some wants to bleed, in any manner that it may be, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a light clyster, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful fluids to the principal members;
Nor does one bleed well who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as he is, nor the dropsy-stricken.
and worse still to bleed after colic passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiple of labor in women, and childbirth, and vigil, and fasting, and that which totally the virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then purify the humors, if he is thick with meats and drinks and medicines, if you have his permission for it.
Then between baths, if nothing prevents it, to purify the blood, and heal from the vein of the arm or the third part (of the body), as we have said.
And keep yourself on that day from labor, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
And be lying and joyful, and let the  shoulders be higher than him who is healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then restrain the linen on top in the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct it without a surgeon.
And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and are felt.
Then moisten the shoulders with a little bit of old oil, then put his finger of his left hand above that vein below the armpit one finger's breadth where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not go and fail to be pierced.
For there are veins that are as taut as cords in the body, and some that are full of airiness, so that when one puts the flame upon them, they withdraw from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with some of these; and if they open the vein, the wound is too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then it begins again a little below that place or where it has been opened, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the place is inflamed, and the patient fears it, then let him leave it for a day or two, and not tie up his arm: for by chance there may come boils or abscesses.
Do not enter into a bath, then restart the bleeding if he wishes.
And if the wound is small, or the vessel is subtle and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then pierce in that same wound all the way straight through.
And put a point gently, so that the veins are swollen. For this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, then do not restart the bleeding, and put on a bit of oil dressing, because it stops the body from bleeding, and is good for this wound.
and thus administer the paste of oil to each vein that you open, to stop the flow of blood.
and the same thing is done with a triangle and a bow, when it is placed over the place; so that it shrinks the veins and spreads apart when it is too large.
And if it comes to an abscess that grows large, which happens often, even when it is only opened once and the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put a sponge soaked in water and salt on it, lukewarm, and hold it for one hour;
and you must do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or discoloration, it will not harm him; and if you see, put on nothing of aloes or frankincense, mixed with juice of calamus, mintwort, or the like.
And many times abscesses and appearances appear at the basilica of the saint.
Put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance evil. Therefore, I warn you not to put anything on it of what we have said, because by chance it may cut off the artery.
but the wound should be bandaged dry to harden the place, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And treat each wound with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it seep out until it is red. and if you see it growing large, let it remain until it subsides. And if it is too swollen, let it cool down.
And for him who is pale and thin, and needs the extraction of blood, one makes a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
And to one who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from the decrease of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than the bleeding done long or wide.
And to one whose body needs bloodletting, it is fitting to give soft bread in pomegranate juice; If he is heated, treat him with bloodletting three or four times. And if he is of cold complexion, let him eat soft bread dipped in mucid syrup, or in honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if it bleeds at the vein, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he moisten broth of flesh, and fragrant syrup subtle, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And whoever wants to empty his arm after the first vein is opened, and he has a strong body, so it will heal seven hours after the first opening, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to bleed from another side, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood within the body that is already heated, and brings fever; if it is necessary to drain a great quantity, and widen the opening until it reaches the bone. then that you fulfill all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come to him from bone, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent.
and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated and to make blood flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press hard upon it. if it is crooked, let him extend his arm fully, because this would be bad;
but let him leave it so until he heals the second time. or you point it to the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen at the opening of the vein flows out, and place upon his fingernail returned sharp, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity is to draw blood a second time, if the vein in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the cauterizing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the bone is red.
Then it is bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then cauterize it now through, neither too wide nor too long;
And let the opening be wide, and cauterize well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, put the hand back in hot water, and leave it to bleed in the water until you have enough;
And if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more there in winter than in summer;
And the cauterizing of this vein is safer of all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The cauterizing of the salvation vein on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Restrain the hand, and put it in hot water, as long as the vein is swollen, if one can see it. And if it heals crookedly, and if you cut it completely off entirely, if it causes no harm;
and do not pierce it too much, for the nerves are all beneath the skin, and then put the hand in hot water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot be pulled out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put on the vein oil and wool to close it tightly, and do this with each one.
The vein of him in the left hand is as good for the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have told you towards the right.
The blood of the sophene is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as diseases of the belly, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the qualities of its healing are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it softens, and binds above the joint of the foot; And the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
So heal there, in the larger vein or at the ankle, whichever is worth more.
And if you heal it upon the foot, guard the nerves that are below, and heal by traversing also as in cutting;
and let the flames be gentle.
And if the vein cannot be issued forth, put the foot in water again, and let it bleed well.
And if the healing fails the first time, begin again the second at a point above, because the flesh is salty;
Do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and in this way do from the other foot equally.
The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle of the leg, and its pain reaches to the hip when it is hot with blood.
And the qualities of its healing are that the patient enters hot water, and is stretched above the ankle IV times in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
And if it opens, heal it in every way that you can, and by traversing. and it is better that you cut it, because the flesh is dry, and it is much well-supplied with blood of men.
and it is better that you cut it, because the flesh is dry, and it is much well-supplied with blood of men. And if you do not find it, so search any vein of him who opens or back of the foot, and towards the small thigh, and guard the nerves.
and make so much bloodletting as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on it and restrain. it is now healed.
Suctions are made of horns, or of skin, or of glass;
and suctioning is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suctioning which is without pricking is done in two ways: either it is with fire, or without fire;
and suctioning which is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places of the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the head; and the others is removed the neck; and the others in the ribs of the neck; and the cupping glass below the chin; and the cupping glass on the shoulders; and the cupping glass on the hips; and the cupping glasses removed from the arms; and the cupping glasses from the legs; and the cupping glasses from the ankles;
and cupping does not treat blood but rather the small veins that are spread throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken as much as opening a vein; and it is not appropriate to administer it with heat or cold fire in any illness that comes from repletion until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to blow up, or for customs, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time.
because there are some who, when they have need to blow up, have heavy heads;
and there are those who have fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bite their tongues. And there are some who dream, and see by blood and numbness and death and similar things.
And when we saw these signs, and even when it is gone for one month, we order them to vomit after three hours of the day.
The vein of the temple helps in the greatness of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not proper that this be done after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it does not become those who are of cold complexion in use, or who have a catarrh, because this causes them great discomfort.
and for this reason it does not become the elderly in use, nor those who have or cold diseases.
And those who are cured of it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The ventilation in the neck is in place of bloodletting of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the alleviation of the pain, and for cutting open the channel of the pharynx, and for all, and for repletion.
and it should not be applied too strongly, because if it is held too tightly, it may cause blockage in the stomach and heart.
The ventilation at the two costals of the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of bloodletting of the basilica.
And it is necessary that you command the healthy one that he press his hand when putting it, so that he does not cut the artery, and that there comes no flow of blood.
The incisions under the chin are good for mouth sickness, and gum rot, and similar illnesses which are in the mouth. and are in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and fullness.
The incisions on the arms are as useful as the three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from those large veins.
and instruct the patient not to pull too much on it, for the skin is bare and shows nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the base, and diseases below, and it should be large and made of brass, so it needs to draw well; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and this makes great wounds.
Suction cups on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the hips, groin, and bladder, and loosen up the flowers;
and are in place at the two shoulders, and the two ankles, and all ways they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many positions.
The manner of applying the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and successively, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this, until you see the skin red and inflamed, and appears the red color of blood.
then firmly, and reapply the suction cups, and take heed to the position of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a deep incision; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to cut twice. The first time to subtilily open the vein of blood thick.
And if the vein is very thick, then it behooves to cut a third time;
And when we want to draw blood little by little, then we suffice with only one incision. And if we want much blood, then we frequently repeat the incisions;
And if the vein is thick, we pierce it in full force, and the end that the keyers be pierced very strongly, and it behoves the one who has coarse and hardened skin, and whose pores are closed, that you apply to their leus suction cups of oil appetizing and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of oil from pumpkin seeds;
and if it is in summer, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluities are large and cold, then take oil of wormwood, or of balm, or of anise, and similar things.
And if the one whom one heals has tender flesh and large pores, there is no need to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after the inflation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, let him rise from ash, or myrtle water, and sumacs, and similar things.
And those who have great excesses shall rise from old wine, or of their own water, or of a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and one should not draw blood with leech before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two;
and one should not sleep after blood-letting, and it is necessary that he warm himself when he is about to be bloodied and when he has been bled.
And guard those who are being bled if they are choleric, and if their blood is too much and inflamed; if it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the waist, and similar things; and minced kidneys, and roast pork, and moist meats.
and minced kidneys, and roast pork, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and wine smelling medium, which is between old and new, and mince parsley, and minces onions and small eggs and sparrows.
And on the day that he will be treated, he must drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give no man at any time thyme or nutmeg before the cupping, or after, to comfort the main limbs; and be subtle the herbs, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The cupping glasses that are put without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the back and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their skin, and it is done only in order to draw blood from limb to limb, as we put them on the nipples when the child is born;
To remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the cheek to lessen the member;
and to remove pain when there is an inflammation or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the inflammation, or moves the stone from its place;
And thus it acts when it is placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable to it have been boiled;
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is here:
And it must be two inches wide and half a palm in length, and have a small hole on the side about the middle, like for inserting a needle, and be of metal, so that it does not chill the patient when placed upon the limb;
and in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to put a handle and they are great and small according to the illnesses and the strength of those who take them
for the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and of thin ones than fat ones.
And thus one must put this suction cup on the limb:
grasping the handle of wax or linen, and place it in the suction cup across from the rod which is in the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and those two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one wants, there goes the vapor, and one removes the suction cup
and grasp the linen as before, and recommence it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup therefore which is administered in illness of pleuresin, to every acute pain, has no stem nor point, and is not administered unless it is full of water, and is put upon the member only so much
and this is its form:
Suction cups are not administered unless in members where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar to them; and in their naked flesh, such as two or nails, and other similar;
and the qualities of the user are that when you find suction cups that are in clear sweet waters without impurities, then take them;
and put them one nut in fresh water, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be cured of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on leeches.
and when they are full and fall off, if it is possible to put a cupping glass there, put one, because this is very good after.
If not, lift the place with ease, and then water, well, and then rub it;
and if the wounds are too painful after the leeches, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the swelling subsides.
and if the swellings are multiplied, put on top ground vitriol or alum, and similar things, until it subsides.
or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry up on the place, it will now stop.
And if you need more of this, take other ointments.
And if the ointments will not be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until it bleeds, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they ignite.
And when you see that they are burning, put powder on a bit of aloe and silphium ground up, or ashes, and now they will subside.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know this, dear son, that the fools who are looking to this chapter, will never have seen any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason, science is estranged in our land, because I never found any good one.
And I know nothing of it, except through the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered its science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
And I have shown you in this chapter what is contained, and abridged it at the end, and clearly showed the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I did in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if the heat is not very good, or too cold;
and eat cold meats, that is to say, cold mutton and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, as long as you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb;
If the patient returns to his former regimen that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a thick nourishment, or there is viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment they recover strength and the fracture heals more quickly.
And know that bones broken in the elderly and decrepit people cannot be well set or healed according to their nature because of dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too soft, such as the bones of small children.
But if there is no cure, put the broken bone back into the big tendons that are tight and join the limb together, as much as it can until it is strong as before. and to all points of his work, and for this reason he should be fed with thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or hip, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes into a groove, and another in sharpening, like the edge of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes into a groove, and another in sharpening, like the edge of a pen for writing. And if with fracture and wound, and fracture to a small crack all around.
And to each manner has its own instrument and tool proper in the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place.
And it is known the fracture of the bone by those that the skin is twisted, and opens well outward, and sounds upon pressure of the hand.
and when there is no twisting or deformity at the touch, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture.
but it can still have twisting, or a split, or a small fracture. If you must not move it by hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle and its two parts are disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that an abscess may come from it.
And if an abscess does come there, let him leave it alone for no day until the abscess is appeased.
Then put it together as gently and wisely as you can, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has fragments.
Then restrain it, as it should be hereafter.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, if it is of two parts, whether hand or foot, or to your hand if it is one small limb, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
And put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that through your work no damage or pain comes to the patient.
And adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well.
If it is well aligned, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make come from their work abscesses hot and contractions to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; And guard well that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
And guard well that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain. And guard that it be set straight, that no twisting may come when it is restored.
And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as hips and thighs:
so it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and firm linen, because the broad linens enclose the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap;
Then bind with light bandages, III or IV turns according to the limb, and hold your hand a little on all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, that the fracture then move away a little from the fracture;
And soften the linen a little at a time, as long as you feel most of the healthy part, then take the other bandage, and turn it back over the broken part;
Then go back to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above;
Then put between the bandages padding of linen or cloths, as long as it is all equal, then tie everything above with the bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on it a soothing thing for the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and let him thus for some days.
Then restrain above the edges, and let them be half a cane's breadth carefully drawn, or of wood from which one makes clips, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure:
But it is necessary that the edge that one puts on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others;
And let it also be as long as it is necessary for the limb of smallness or greatness; Then restrain on the edges also as you did in the first hour, then tie above a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture; More strict is above, less below;
And it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too fine, and be of soft linen.
For if the thread is thick, as I want works of fools who make their stitches with coarse linen cords, and it is a great error, because the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not be that between each star there is less than two points of space.
And if the patient is sore at the sites of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy parts, put under them poultices of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not become blistered.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it does not behoove to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day. Because when the member is large, it is not necessary to put stitches further than after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your surety of abscess heat appearing.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
And it is that you take flour that is held to the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundance of egg, and put this preparation, neither too clear nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and also to women and to small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and the twist: Take bayberry and lead, and mule, and asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mugwort, an ounce ten. myrrh and aloes, an ounce five. and alechil nine ounces. and make it powder, and mix them with yolk of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, he should use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones completely, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for twist: take mugwort and wormwood, an ounce ten. myrrh and aloes, an ounce nine. and acai six ounces. Bolic armenic X Z., and grind well, and confit with water or yolk of an egg, and administer it.
Another manner to plaster joints and bones dislocated from their places, and appease the pain arising, and the usage of bone, and the fracture: Take new wool, and moisten it in oil and heat, and put it upon the place.
This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removes pain properly.
Another manner to plaster which restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earth walnut leaves, and grind together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of emplastering for the restoration of a broken bone and to lessen the remainder of the abscess. Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of quince, of each one part;
And grind, and confit with wine, and if the limb is withered, confit it with coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another way of setting a bone more forcefully than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of mallow, and seeds of flax, borage, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part. and grind it, and confit with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ipocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb for restoration other than a certain one made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen one must put on the broken member, to restore, things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of ointment that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and heads of doves cut off, or feathers of bird, and mallow, and wool equally, and grind them, and make an ointment from it and bind it.
And then unbind it a little afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, or if his bones have not moved from their place; if not unbind it not for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest or swelling, then hasten, and untie it, and remove the plaster now.
And take a light cloth, and sponge of moist sea, and dip it in water, and lift the place up, as long as the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of the hot abscess;
And soothe the inflammation of the limb, and the pain is removed, then begin the delicate bandage again, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and gently until he is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and the pain and swelling are all gone, and you need emplastrum and binding, then begin it again, just as you did at first.
And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not unbind it except after III days or IV or V or VII. and no time leave it for XX days, according to what we see, until the fracture is joined, and approaches the setting of the bone.
Therefore, restrain it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I said earlier.
And if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that there cannot come any nourishment; Therefore, use hot water, every time you untie it, and every third day, and moisten the place a little.
Through this work then nourish the limb, and heal quickly those who do foolish things, that they return the limb twisted;
This is bad, and this work is dangerous, and I see nothing else than to let it be and work it straight.
There are many ways of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined;
for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone all the bone up to the surface which is below the bone, as if made high or low; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called “haichure.”
When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called “absolue”;
and is the wound of these two fractures large or small.
And if there is an enmeshed percussion, or a split or of the bone's neck, or of the head on a bone, or similar things.
And if it has a fracture penetrating, which approaches up to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound which is put back into the bone as subtly as a hair, and is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called “capillaire”;
and if the wound which is made either by hitting with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the piece of bone enter inside, and is the  piece like how smiths do when they hit on cauldrons; if it goes between the pieces inside.
And this happens more to those who have or whose head is moist bone, like that of a child.
and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged as if stars; and I will speak of them in their place.
And let us know all the ways of fractures by retracting upon them, and by probing with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on it.
The seeming capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs upon it, the fracture appears black.
In the cure of a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes becoming inflamed and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, so commence the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part like this:
and that you press the head of the patient down firmly, and uncover it on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more carefully than you can, and if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess put a bandage on it, if it is needed, and that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is healed, and be assured of bleeding cessation; Then begins to remove the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work:
One way is that you cut at the narrow edge in front, and this is the form:
And then put another incision larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have a number of different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and some pointed, and some blunt;
and in work lightly, so that you do not break the head.
And if the bone is hard and stiff, then it behooves you to pierce it around, so that you administer cuts with chisels, no more deeply than that it does not go through the test of bone, and it must have above the point a margin or circle that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
And it behooves you to have several, so that each comes in its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all tests;
and this is the form of the III manners of bandages:
The qualities to perceive around the broken bone is that you place a bandage on the bone, and turn to your two until you know that the bone is pierced.
then place the bandage elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do these more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers, pincers;
and keep that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you will have the bone pierced, and treated, it is fitting that you reset the apparatus which is detached from the bone to all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it is fitting that it be more tenacious and more subtle than the other incisor.
and if it remains any of the small bones, or no scales, so carefully to the bone with instruments. then cure the wound with tents and dressings as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galien says, which is drier. and the load much strong, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, then place under the head of this lentil-shaped incisional instrument, for this is its form:
And do not trench from one side, and is the party acute in II coasts, so that the trenching is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer above, so that you tap lightly the bone all around, and give yourself well guard of the cloth that is underneath;
if it is adhered to the bone, then gently remove it, because it is well removed without annoyance, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to first apply this asperity, and remove the scales with a fine rasp which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you begin with coarse rasps, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fracture, you must bring cause according to its arrangement;
and that is thing which is not replied to him who has put his study in this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not injure the wound, then administer above it another linen cloth, and do not bind it too tightly except to keep the wound closed;
and leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of licorice, and chickpea flour, and frankincense powder, and arnica, and similar things.
and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer other medicinal ointments without biting.
and guard that the wound be quite clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor let it join together with flesh, because when flesh joins on the brain's membrane, it inflames and hurts, and brings great evil to the patient;
because when one puts upon it a biting thing, it is burned from above. Take ward then, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blacking does not come forth except for the medicine that has been put upon it, and if it has virtue, then it behooves you to take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drape, and place it upon the wound. then treat it with the ways of treatment that are proper until it is healed.
Know that at times the two parts of the nose are broken above, or one by itself, because they are two bones;
and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your small finger or the other into it, and place that fracture inside your index finger, and on the palm outward, until the bone returns according to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and guard so that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and it cannot come to its place, then you should put it even on top of a rail a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do this again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then put on the head of the finger bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you break the other side if there is a fracture there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the openings of the wounds.
And they said any restorer one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the preparation of a mixture of egg yolk and ground pepper. Then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
And at no time should one put goose feathers in their place, and if the wind blows through there, and it holds the fracture, and it causes the patient to blow among them; or do what you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the new while you work on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. p. of diaquilon.
And if an abscess arises, apply a poultice from the outside of ground sesame seed and powdered incense, mixed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top and do not bind the wounds tightly;
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound, and care for it with appropriate things like flesh, and bandage, as with plasters and ointments suitable for that;
And if inside the bone there is no wound, then cure it with bandages, and put in some splints, until it is healed.
When the jaw is broken below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only outside, and is not broken in two, except for a bulge inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient. And if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger into the mouth, and gently push the fracture inwards, and hold it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jawbone fracture is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it is straight.
And if movement of the teeth happens, or a rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on top of the broken jawbone a cerot, and put a double cloth over it; And place on the cloth a large plate well made, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it onto the wound as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed. And place a plaster on top, of the powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cautery.
And place a light linen bandage on top, and if the plasters dry, and the patient's condition does not change, leave him as long as he is healthy. Many times it heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward if no piece of the bone is removed; If subtle of the bone instruments are suitable to these.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to that, in order to hinder flesh, until it is healed.
The fracture breaks more often in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners:
Where it is broken and separated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore;
Or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work of this is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the arm that feels the broken bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then put the fracture equal to your two, so that the form is as it should be, and there be no appearance or gap.
And if you need to extend more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; and are gently the force applied, and restrain the spear in your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it befits.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes back in place, then it is necessary that the patient lie prone on his arm and place below the shoulder 1 hour glass, and push the ministers' shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
And then apply the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it broken, it is necessary that you divide upon.
and treat the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any raising, then it cut with one of the incisions that you have. but that you place under the force a this instrument, to keep the soft tissue.
and resembles a spoon, and is not quite hollowed out, and be as wide as it suits, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
and it has two ends, as you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are assured of the hot abscess, if cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt hot abscess, if employ the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one bandage in rose oil and in honey and in wine, and place it on top.
The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of powder from the mill and beaten egg white, and put light dressings above, and put a sphere under the seat, if you need it. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm width, then put the double cloth above the dressings and the plaster. Then take a slender stick of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandaged one, so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and put the stick on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and tighten it on each side, and when you see that the bandage holds the bruise well, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reward (bind) it every day, and when the bandage loosens, then bind it again;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the armpit when he sleeps, in order to raise the shoulder higher; so it will lighten the bruise from the pain by aligning the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days;
then restart the bandaging if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it like this until it is restored
and it is restored within at most XXVIII days, and in less for no man
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens sometimes that the shoulder breaks or its socket is displaced in the middle, and it is not known if there was a fracture except by touch;
so set the joint according to the figure of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can;
then put on top of the wound powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light dressings, and put a double cloth above; then put on top a wide and thin pad, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if any part of the pad touches the shoulder, then place cotton dressings beneath it so that the pad lies evenly;
and then binds it with a very strong bandage firmly so that the bone does not move from its place, and look at the joint every day.
and every time it softens, binds it again, and places the bone straight if it is out of place, and lies the patient on his side.
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And when this number is complete, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that is easily put out of place.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and not below the joint, so do it above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe the hot abscess.
of the fracture of the leg
The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the edge.
And when it is broken in its marrow, it sinks to the lower part, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and all things, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passages within the broken bone, and it smells quite bad.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and joins the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and carefully tries to put them straight in every way as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
then put on plasters and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or other light wool, and wrap it in a cloth, and lay it on top of the broken bone so that it doesn't move and turn the band around to the back, and restrain it firmly, and reward each hour the linen, and if it softens, restrain it;
and if it is necessary to loosen it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape away the plaster, and address what has come up there with methods of healing;
then put back on the plaster, and restrain it until it is healed.
of the breakage of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for that reason that they are glassy; and one feels it well at the inquiry so does.
And the restoration is that you set the fracture equal, as it is right. And then put the splint on it, and restrain it with a stick, if you need it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inwards, one feels the patient great pain, and prickling, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone points the skin. and besides pains, and coughs and vomits great planty of blood, and this is of grave sickness, and the ancients put great engine upon it.
And if some say it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to expel the wind outward.
We do not do this, except for hot abscesses, if they have not yet come. And if it has come, then treat it.
And they said of these [ventouses], one puts on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable. Nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction does not draw the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness.
And they say any one of you should cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the lying wound, then be cured of the plague of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that pokes the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to split above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to ward off the lung.
And then one must cut the bone, and drain slightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess comes, then put on a soft cloth in rose oil, and put it on the place.
and cure while the place of those that it is fitting to abscess, and be lying soundly on the ribs where it should, until it is healed.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing.
Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when they are pulled and held still, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one puts care to it.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, then take ward if the limbs are softened, and if the accident is that which is in hands, and on the back there is looseness and discharge without will;
and when one has it settled on its belly, then there is discharge without will. And when it is set on its back and he wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not labor in his care.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
And the cure is that you should warm it if there is an abscess, and put on its spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased.
Then put on top one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
And if any bone becomes dislocated, then you should cover it with the heat; and set the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and then treat it with ointment that promotes flesh growth, until it is healed.
And if the bone of the arm is broken, which is called the 'bone of the elbow', then you put your pouch on your left hand and set it level with the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it;
Then restrain it, and if there are displaced bones, do likewise to them, and set the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the break of the bone of the hip
Sometimes it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there should be a little lessening at the top. And make it long and sloping to the side, and come to the patient pain at the place, and tingling, and swelling of what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are on the fracture; and know what is the fracture and its shape.
And if the fracture is at the top only, set it straight, as long as it is in natural form.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines inward, so make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you. And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of bark, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move.
and place the piece under the ribs, until the bone is level. And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed, and put upon it what we have said before. and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there are no bad accidents.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the rib and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of two ways.
one of which is that you take a piece of medium thick wood, according to this form:
And tie the two pieces with two bands, and bend them upward, and set the patient on a stool.
Then the bone of his arm is broken above the armpit, until it comes to the shoulder, and has in the middle a curvature of stick, then leans on no heavy thing or the minister stretches it down.
Then put the splints the fracture even to his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture in their hands, and the other holds below at all .i. point, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is too far, restrain the limb below the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each minister to its side.
And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then it behooves you to put one linen halfway under the armpit, and the other towards the side, below the fracture.
And also if the fracture is towards the side, then it behooves to put the linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture be even on the place, and on the side;
Then put the fracture even, as it should, and restrain it, if abscess comes there.
And if an abscess comes there, do not restrain it until the 7th day, and put on a half-linen cloth in  oil of roses, until the abscess is calmed.
Then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the bandage on the break, then assemble the arm onto the auxiliary, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and put the bandage, and restrain on the auxiliary, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use splints, and put on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint 1 finger's width of space, and be each splint so large that it passes the break 3 fingers on each side;
then restrain above the bones, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on the bruise, more strongly and less in distancing
And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, so leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said;
then look every three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the nourishment cannot come to the limb for because it is too tightly bound If the address, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, so do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
and put under the shoulder one cushion of plain wool equally, and look each hour of the day or of the night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the bonds are softened.
if he addresses it by the virtue of medicine, and gives him the meat that we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat is first finely minced; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in 40 days from all; and then one must unbind it and administer baths and medications for the place to be treated.
And if the stricture is bad and obstructed, it remains for 1 day or 2 months to loosen.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "fossil," because one is small and it follows the socket;
and the other is large and it is the one that is below, towards the small one;
Sometimes the large fossil breaks alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small fossil is broken, the restoration is light, and healing;
And when the bone is broken, its healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.
If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it should be gently extended and made even.
And if it's the big bone, then it should be pulled harder.
and extend it over the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small ones lower than the other hands, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor;
Then extend the minister's arm below to his hand, or on the rope, and one other minister to the other above.
And then put the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as and the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take the care.
And if at the beginning of restoration abscesses appear, then glue the veil of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and lay him covered gently on top, until the abscess is calmed.
And then remove the cautery, and put on the plaster of ground powder with abundance of egg white, then put on the stitches, and let the stitch of the scalpel be more outward, and a little wider than the others.
and know that it must have six stitches or arms in more positions: whether the cut is in one of the bones, or two.
and pull it more upwards above the cut than elsewhere, and all days less in moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. and let the bandages that are on the cut be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
and let the bandages that are on the cut be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is stitched, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And reward the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the member with hot water, until the itching is appeased;
and leave the limb not too tight resting.
And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the bandage.
And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the numbness passes, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen him until 20 days.
Or if it's a wound, then he places his hands on his neck, and keeps his necks equal, and guards against movement and agitation, and sleeps on his back;
and know that this sprain is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and on us there are few fractures, and it comes but rather often a sprain many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed, and be straight in front of him equally;
then put his hand on the board outstretched, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them equal in sight, until they are well joined;
and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be enveloped in a linen sheet.
And if the fracture is at the bottom of the foot, near the plant of the foot, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken plant. and then tighten it with a long cloth, and let the splint of hard wood be as large as the palm of the hand, and tighten it, as is necessary.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and seal the linen between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the two bones, if it is the bone, set it straight, as necessary. and tighten it with the plant, and if you see that it is put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move.
And if the fracture is as the other two, such as in the index or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that is after. Or you tie them all in a line, as much as it is worth, or put on a splint, such as our pouch.
And take care in the restoration and in the arrangement of a hot abscess, and help those who come to it, as I have said.
The bones of the hip are many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns forward and backward.
And the restoration is done by tying one linen above the fracture, and the other below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his tie to his side evenly;
and that is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, so one of the ligaments towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the bandage be below the knee, and let the extension be downwards.
Then put the two hands on the bone equal, until it is according to its natural shape, and then put the splint and the bandage, if pus does not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm then return to your work and your cure; The bandage is made in this manner.
It is necessary that you envelop the wound with two or three layers of hard bandage doubled, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put the long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread upwards;
Then turn over the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the broken bone splints, and place a splint on the leg bone.
Then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloth to make even tightening, then begin to bind in three or four turns around the fracture. and as you go higher above the fracture, and less restrict it;
then tighten the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and hip, and bind three splints that are above, then return to below at the head of the thread, as far as you come near the foot;
and restrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any other sign. And if it occurs, untie it, and dress those that come, as we have said many times.
and if there are pieces of bone that pierce, it is necessary to remove them, if one can. and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place and drain pus. And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And at no time is the hip broken in this way when one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder and arm;
however, in this restoration made, the patient does not feel any pain.
And know that the fracture is healed in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the varieties of constitutions.
Know that in the area of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is no longer than a fissure, or opening, and it happens to all wounds, and without wounds, and this everyone feels well.
And the restoration is so when one puts it equal to those that are rounded to its sides, as long as it can be moved together.
Then put the splint on, and put a round piece of wood on top if you need it, and restrain it as appropriate, then follow all the precautions we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things; Apply to each injury what is fitting for it, until he is healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right "femur," and the other "tibia";
and all fractures come about like those in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is all here. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in every direction.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and turns downwards.
Then administer an extension, and place it even, and tie the straps evenly;
But nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less severe and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of thick fur that encircle the leg on both sides, and be long from the knee down;
then wrap them around the legs with two bandages above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this junction the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good;
and none administer  bars along the length of the leg, and if it is of fur, and it is placed on the leg to prevent movement, and properly made are these in the fracture where there is a wound;
and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident. if it cures as long as it is sound.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come at any time fracture and to two places, and there is not there been other than that which causes in many positions.
And if there happens as bone of the foot broken, and you see these bones overlap each other, put the patient on his foot on the earth, as if he wanted to walk, and then put now your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so much that they return into their places;
then put the splint and bandages on top, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at II shoulder high, then restrain it to the foot according, then that you have wrapped cloths around, and other things which you need.
And when three days or four will have passed, undo the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the wrists broken, restore them, as we have said to the wrists of the hand; then put on the broken arm a splint according to the length of the arm, and be one point more wide, then put under the foot that table that I said, and strain evenly.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, if put on each arm a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the table under the foot; and be standing on the top of the table farther from the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things that I have said to other fractures, as we have said; and care for each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the hand
When the bone of nature in a woman is broken, make her sit with her thighs spread apart, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her from behind.
then fill the cavity of the woman’s body with cotton, and put as much in as the space allows;
then turn the woman, and lift her back up and down, so that the cotton is pushed until it comes to the entrance of the vagina, and returns the bone with the stomach.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished urinating, put it back in, and do this for seven days or until. then the fracture will be restored, and if you see it, take a sheep’s bladder, and tie a chain to the opening, and put the whole bladder into the vagina. Then blow into the groin region, until the bladder is swollen inside. Nature will return the fracture itself;
then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
and these fractures close to this are not hidden from those who put their study and use into it, and read my book.
For the fracture signifies in more postures the right way of restoration: Therefore, understand this.
In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it into the shaft; then wrap it in bandages, and leave it for three days or until it is fully healed, and it will heal completely.
of fracture with wound
It behooves him who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then let the restraint of vitriol remain, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that same day, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess does come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it in place gently with your hands, by small extension.
And if the extension is not prepared for you to put it equal with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that the one using it grasp three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture;
and be round and a little thick, that it does not bend at the compression upon the member in your work, and be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved part be placed upon the head of the visible bone; and the but at once, so long as it revives, and be equal one against another. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, until the instruments have purchase.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either a chisel or saw, to your power.
Then remove that which remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then soak the bandage in dark red wine and properly that's where it lies. And do not put on the wound anything else or oil except what is fitting for the healing, so that it may not bring about decay and corruption.
Then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the amount of the wound, and take good care that the wound be not strained with the fracture.
And many times this has been done foolishly, and brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time. and let the strapping be softer and more slack than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has occurred, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put on splints. but wrap around it, in place of splints, hard cloths, and tie them.
And when you see after one day or two that the wound is bowing, remove what you have put on top and put healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetra-formation and similar things.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is united and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bone goes down gently.
And if the next day, and it cannot unite anymore but returns back bone, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these loose pieces which bring that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before.
And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bones, and similar large members, do not touch it, because many times death results, but let it be until it can heal.
Perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall out by itself, then you can care for the wound if you are able.
And if you are unable, leave it alone.
We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing is to see the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot make the limb its natural works.
Take care therefore if it belongs to us: If he administers astringent medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaice, and similar others, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and confit them with astringent wine or with abun of egg or with aisil; and put them on the wound in bandages, and restrain it well, and do not untie it for days;
and put them on the wound in bandages, and restrain it well, and do not untie it for days; and then untie it, and recommence another one, as long as the swelling is removed;
or you restrain on a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are that it takes away all the swellings from the limbs;
and if the knot has already become hardened like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then the skin above, and make the superfluity appear; or you put it back on no razor, until it is removed, and the cure as long as it is healed.
of the limb that is weak after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: for one reason is because it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it should; or for the reason that there were too many ties, and cannot come the nourishment to the limb; or for multitude of arsement; or for too great movements, not at its hour; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and leisure;
then put poultices on the limb so that the poultice attracts to it great nourishment, and the swelling often of water is reduced, until the nourishment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
the limb after the healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
If you do not believe the fools who say that one must break a limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land;
and these works are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and by chance death;
Nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, then it is fitting that they be bathed in hot water, or softening herbs be boiled, such as leaves of willowherb, and roots, and marshmallow, and similar things;
and the boil with a softening plaster, such as diacylum well made, and take the mucilage of willowherb, and confit it with lard or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top.
Or you take fat figs, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. And make the member move each hour.
And if the crookedness is ingrained and hardened, as with stone, then it is necessary to remove it with iron, so it should be cut up to the bone, with a sharp and light scalpel. and put care and study into the treatment.
Dislocation is an exit from any joint from its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly shaped, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it should now be brought back without splinting.
For if one delays, then the limbs swell, and by chance if it is set back in place with pain;
for because of this it is not fitting to move it while it is swollen. many times brings forth spasms and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens,  if it is healed the patient, then leave him, until the abscesses are all appeased;
then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then set it gently, and cure each member as the wound comes in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head to the foot.
It happens sometimes that the jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners. or they are a little bit displaced from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the chin, and cut the saliva from the mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with the word.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by the many more dispositions.
And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, then you must reset it gently, and do not delay at all;
and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the sick person, and puts his middle finger into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers of both hands be outside, to put it equal;
and command the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions. And the finger puts it straight, until it returns to its place.
And if bringing them back is painful, even if they are the two jaws together, then apply hot water and oil, until they soften gently;
do not delay bringing them back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with soft material, it is placed on damp cloths in a cloth made of rose oil and wax, then it is lightly tied with soft bandages;
And the patient sleeps on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move them to the right or to the left, nor does he strive to chew, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are numb.
And then he eats what he wants lightly, and does not strive to open his mouth when eating or drinking, until the jaw is well numbed and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be set back in an hour, and are not brought back to their places, then come fevers and accustomed swellings, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of cold phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is a healing; and many times die those who have it, in nine days.
The forceps cannot dislocate from within the side of the rib and from the hip, and it is dislocated no time at the outside, and well one feels it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on the splint and bandage, and restrict it;
and the joint which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if it does, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the splint and bandage, and restrict it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed;
and in the same way bring back the joint of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways:
one of which is that it dislocates to the side of the axilla towards the groin; and the second is to the part of the hip; and by chance dislocated to the upper part, and this happens rarely;
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves;
and many times dislocated downwards towards the seat, even to those who have little flesh, because in these it is easier to be displaced ;
to those who have enough flesh, it is with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore it behooves you to prove it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the cure.
And it is known the dislocation when it is down towards the seat, and put a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the seat to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his side, nor move in any way;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is ill;
And the way is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their hands under the seat, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it downwards; then they come (or it comes) gradually.
And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water. and administer a soothing and softening ointment such as a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered.
then have the patient lie on their back, and place under the seat a piece of wool even, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull on the hand of the sick person.
and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down; That shoulder now returns all by itself, and if you see this happening follow this way.
and that you have a strong man present who is stronger than the patient; and be right towards the rib, and push the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and raise the armpit up, so that the patient hangs on the arm. and some other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, he can lift anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another way:
and then one puts a long stick in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is also as straight as a post, and it be neither too big nor too thin; then it is put under the patient, but that it have drapes above, and the patient be standing on the length of the stick;
then its hand is stretched down on the other side, forming, and the joint returns to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: Take a splint of the arm's length and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter from below the armpit, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the staff drapes down so that the staff does not prick the patient, then place it below the armpit of the patient;
and extend the arm on top of the staff's length, and tie the humerus to the staff, and the arm at the hand's head, then place the arm on the edge of a board broad enough, and let the hands be extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint is now reset.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behoves you to put under the saddle a sphere of wool even, then put the emplasters prepared powder from the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then restrain it under the saddle evenly, and turn the linen on the emplasters, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he keep quiet as much as the limb is strengthened because it will heal faster;
and then be quiet more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is hardened and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then you must administer cautery to III places, as it is shown in front of or chapter of cautery.
And if you do all these things, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened. and know that the joint is never fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is toward the buttock, and the breast, or behind, is done by impulse, and stretching of the hands, and it administers in another place.
and treat until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with blows, and returns with blows.
and if it is dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because one sees it well and feels it well. and dislocates according to each form. And when you join the diseased knife with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus as abscesses come, because if abscesses came, then it would be grievous to reset it.
and by adventure cannot be brought back entirely at all, even when it is in the rear; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by adventure death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend your hand to its two hands. and his arms be spread, and the hands of him according to the blade around, above and below, and puts the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fire of the root of the palm the blade which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension;
and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and hold it by the ministers so that it does not move in extension;
then turn the arm on each side, then that you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth;
and when the mire has joined the joint to his hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together, as long as it returns;
and when it is in its place, put upon plaster dry with auburn of one egg, and strain together, and put the arm at the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then untie.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let him;
and if you see that the joint is not well strung, then recommence the plaster and the bandage, and let him so for some days, as long as it is firmly put. Then untie.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub him well, and press until he is soothed. or you put on the joint a fleece of fat wool, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let him enter into the bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put back the fleece on top, and then enter into the bath. and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed.
and if you see fit, put on a warm bundle of moist fleece with butter, and fasten it up.
then it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, more than the other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb becomes swollen or that an abscess comes hot.
And the bringing back is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places it equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in its place; then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table at extension and return. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient puts the back of their hand on the table, and the healer places their hand above the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply poultices of soothing plasters, and let him leave so as not to restart.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after several days, the joint remains twisted.
and does not harm the patient further than that while his hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything at all. Therefore, know that the nerve is severed, or the artery.
If there is no other remedy except to constrict with a cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is sound.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At no time are the bones of the hand dislocated on each side, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly;
Therefore, they are the bones, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the bone, and lean it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for two days, and then put it even on that day.
and of the knot we have said, and untie it each day, and let it move, and tie the knot again.
And do this often, until it is tight, and just as well if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
And just as well if it is dislocated from elsewhere.
of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the joints jump out without volition, and cannot be held in place, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one.
And many times it moves the joint at four parts.
The one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure of this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood. if there is no cure nor healing of all.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, said the old ways of cure with great words, in which there is not much profit at all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is nothing nor healing;
and also that which comes directly in the two sides, and one cannot cure except for that properly which comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in a level place, and have a strain below him so that he does not bleed.
then put the tinder in the head into the earth forming, and the other at the feet, and tie a linen below the hips of the patient, and the other at the waist, knees, and ankles.
and the minister knows the links, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bones.
and they should be well closed, the bones as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of III arms long, and place it under the loin, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the loin, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mire his feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place;
and if you see, then do it with the turning crank that turns by hand. And is that you put two bones at the head of the sick person of one arm of great length, and towards the feet two others, and between each bone, above and below, a palm's width of length;
and have in each twig a hole pierced, or the turn (of the fire) is corrected, and be the twigs firmly in earth, so that they do not move.
and between each two twigs have one turning twig, so that the line turns, and have in each turning two small twigs of an arm's length, to turn the fire.
and then tie the line which is among the ashes to the fire towards the head, and the other line towards the feet to the other fire, and each of the ministers turns his fire all along the line, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is straightened, place on top a drying plaster with abundance of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of three fingers' length, that covers the location of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then bind it with a line as we have said, and use the patient to subtle nourishment, until he is healed;
And if any thing comes at the end of health, it is fitting to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the method that we have said before; And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes it comes to the appearance in the lower vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone which opens, therefore one should not have presumption there: for it might bring death by chance.
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only with dislocations, and do not come out like the other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parts: inward and outward, and forward and backward;
and more inward then, and less dislocated forward and backward.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within it is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot double his knee at the fire. And it is the limb which is beneath swollen with a hot abscess, because of that the head of the hip comes near.
And the sign of him to whom it comes on the outward side, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of him who has it in front, is that his leg is well according to its fulfillment; However, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and his anger is softened, and his hip is at the place below the ribs.
The returning of this kind of dislocation is that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, there is no cure; and he must have no presumption.
And in this one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of these four manners of dislocation, so hasten that you return the joint, and the length inside and outside, and the movement to right and left. perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other care.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply the minister strongly, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or on the ligament that lies above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then tightly grips with a forceful pull on the hip. and another holds the head of the ligament
and extend upward and downward all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If this is not so, then it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
When the dislocation is at the hip, then it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then place the linen on the root of the thigh, and the one that is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the thigh;
then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large root of the diseased thigh, and extend it outwardly formed: if it will return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong linen strip above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two times more than the other;
Then he must be hung by the head of a pole, and on the ground two arms' length.
Then command to the minister that he embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers stand with the patient, who firmly embrace the hip, for the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and restrain the limb on the leg properly, and on the foot also.
Then put two sticks, one at the head and one at the foot, then place a stick between the hips of the patient to help form it. And have bundles of damp cloths around it so that it doesn't burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the minister puts his hand on the dislocation evenly.
If it returns, it is good.
If this is not so, put him on a table,  and press him as we have said in the glossary, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg as much as possible, and according to what I have said. and puts the hands his pain on the angry sick, then presses with the other hand, and the end down toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the sick person down, nor raise up on the ground, but rather that he be as though the hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips. and be on his face, and the band extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table. and it will be at point when the sick person extends his legs, and they will be equal. then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the band of a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and rest for three days or four, then undo it, and put the splint on top.
and if you see that they are even, hold them, as before, and let it be three days;
then untie it, and allow it to move freely, until the limb is fortified.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
and does not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he cannot bring it to his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee. And some other ministers extend their foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he feels his leg at his hip lightly.
And put the plaster on top, and make him raise his leg to his hip, and let them be bound together for three or four days, then untie it.
And do not let the patient work at all to go, until the limbs are strengthened.
And if the limb is not in place, administer a strong stretching, as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and outside.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front of where it was dislocated:
The return should be gentle, and one must extend it gently with his hands when he is just numbed.
And when it is dislocated completely, then you must have the patient sit upright, and hold him down by one minister by the leg, above the ankle;
Then treat the foot with your right hand, then with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and push the foot up nicely.
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
If it returns, that's good;
if not, begin the work again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stick a  rail firmly into the ground between their hips, and tie cloths around it so that it doesn't move the patient.
then hold the hips with ministers, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or to the rail so that they tie it above the ankle. then extend each minister equally, and the rail should be placed between the hips of the patient to hold them down while being extended.
Then put the mire equal the dislocation with his hands, and others ministers hold the sound leg at the groin, and the dislocation will return easily.
And when it is pointed, put the plaster and stoppings on top, and the strain forms, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bonds are not too tight.
Then let him leave it for two or three days, and if the bonds soften, tighten them again.
Then unbind on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days. And if he goes before that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to it then you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
of two When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them well without effort, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, then it behooves you to make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table quite straight, and put your foot upon what separates the joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it comes back.
And when it is aligned and there is nothing separating it, then put under the sole of the foot a board two hands wide, then restrain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then unbind it. And make him rest until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not modest in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold;
and use at the beginning of things soothing poultices hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope in it, then set the limb now to its place, so that the abscess may come to a head there;
and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing poultices hot, and treat the wound as it is necessary, with dried dressings;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, set them, and do what we have said in simple ailments;
And guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it brings you misfortune according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
