Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have attained its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is part of my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation of surgery is well established in our region and in our time, yet it remains largely private, despite the importance of its science and the clarity of its principles. Only a few brief descriptions can be found in the works of the Ancients, which correct many errors and hesitations, but the understanding of it is limited, and its force and art are diluted.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that I should vivify that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; so that it comes into line with the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work through the addition of declaration and preparation, which is necessary for these causes.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More the reason why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and that its actor before this had to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew entering into which he understood the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the sinews, their number, and their texture; and of the veins pulsating and the quiet ones, and the places of the movement of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this, Hippocrates is said to name the hand as primary, more in the small work, and most of all in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More over, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for whoever does not know what we said about anatomy, will fall into error on account of which many men will die, as I have seen too many of those. For some are formed in this science and go from there to another science and its experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who incurred an apostematia scrophulosa in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that much blood flowed, and the woman died among her many sufferings.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who almost drained a stone from a man who had been suffering for a long time, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the stone to be extracted, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he will likely die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black servant who had a fracture in the thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, placing it over the wound with cushions and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then the leaving for a few days as commanded that we release the ligament; and thus remain until the thigh and foot heal properly, and proceed to recovery.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the bandage, and peace and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But still, as the corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not refrain from stopping that, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the member while the illness persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there was another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which its malignity grew significantly to the detriment of its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain is purely from melancholic humors, and does not affect everything completely, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is risky in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed here in all parts of this libretto where the operation is full of error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak and to disgrace you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and keep your weapons against what makes you fear, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not betrayed: for more remains to your glory, and more in this world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gout is already dissected in some monastic works:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness falsely, so that bad doctors will not be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the livre, and first with the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered in the head of the foot, on the forms of the instruments and on the tools of the cautery, and on what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on suction cups, and on boils, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medical tools, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, we begin the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will describe the qualities of the cautery and its ingredients, and in which conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery's juice and its ingredients is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; many wise men have already spoken extensively about it, and they are in disagreement. For my part, I content myself with a small portion of their sermons, fearing excessive length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus it is said that the cautery benefits all conjunctions universally which are of flesh or sinew, except two conjunctions, which are joint connections of sinew.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the joint of the leg and foot, which are of flesh, they will dry up; for some said that the cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that the cautery is not suitable in disease which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a disease which is of flesh and dry should be healed by what is cautery and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And you dismiss those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all joint disease and foot disease that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body and its humors to the nature of fire, you find man's body to be dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to that speech, for I have already experienced this several times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Yet I do not consider that it comes to this that one who is already experienced in the practice of cautery through long exercise in the Capitol, and who knows the diversity of human joints and the disposition of diseases in their various forms, as well as the causes of those diseases, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of those diseases.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in the wet diseases, for all doctors are agreed upon those, and they do not differ in applying cautery to them in youth.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, of the secret of curing by cautery with fire and of its goodness, concerning the cautery in medicine that burns, for the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no harm to other members when properly applied.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And the action of the burning medicine reaches that part in the members where it touches, and strongly makes come into the affected member a disease that is difficult to heal and quickly affects it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything but to evaporate excess. We are already well aware of this through experience and a long service of studying the art regarding the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this matter is not written freely in this pause, and if you had not kept your secret about fire, its quality in operations on bodies, and how you expel diseases through its expulsion, I would have spoken philosophically demonstratively, which would have been appropriate for your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and when the best season is spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by accidental timing is submerged in the youthfulness of what is seared by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong boils, which do not tolerate delay due to fear of those caused by evil intent, which are greater than minor damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this is not done on your feet, or, sons, they do not consider it other than the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness which is cured by cautery it is not convenient at all times, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus because they consider it so, for a cautery is not other than in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, however, a cautery in excess over medicine for the swiftness of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexity of the ailment, its location, and its nature, as well as what has been prepared in the body through the accumulation of superfluities within it, or what has been acquired in the body through foods and similar causes; but if the ailment where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar conditions to that one, it is possible that no pain will return in it, but this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is more common to say that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a direct remedy, not as much as what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that benefits either from medicine or from any other cause except the cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is the opposite; and I understand that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one has tried all methods of cure for certain ailments, and those medicines have not been effective, and then, at the end of the treatment, one administers a cautery, which benefits in that case.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point from here begin the last remedies of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they would not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely verified, for I have already tried this and found that it works only in some bodies and not in others. A gold cautery is good and better than iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not determined to you, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and settles in the fire with some sheets so that the artisan can cut through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, you should make the cautery with iron more lightly and more precisely in terms of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the thigh between the feet, so that I delay the asking for what he wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the neck and the ears flowing, and much sleeping, and tooth pain, and colic, and generally all illness that comes through cold, thus as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar symptoms in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild purgative for the head for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that his head be shaved, and place the shaver between your hands on a tilted bench and have his hands rest on his own feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor from your palm near the mouth between the patient's palms.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More over, since the correct location has been determined, mark that location with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place the heated cautery over the marked location with a needle, in such a way that it descends slowly, with your hand gradually pressing it down, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as a grain of millet, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another one if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little of salt, dissolve it in that [liquid], and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place yourself over the wound in the boge (leg) and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with ointment of tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the condyle should be cauteryed within the bone, and that the cautery should be left in until a part of the bone's surface is adhered.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape away what is adhered to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing forcefully into the bone until it cools, and this is Alphécourt's method.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound remain open for a long time, and only then be treated when it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all, only in some men according to fear; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is; for the head is developed by solution of continuity of the head as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitol segon.	Capitulate second.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain that is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garters, cohorns, cap purges, plasters, poultices, pillows, bandages, and face masks, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve his condition from any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold or shows no great pain, then that cautery should be replaced by another.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the seam has split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the seam and uncover the quantity which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand here, but do not uncover the skull, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cautery treatments.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I shall say this cautery in its place, for know that the cautery on which we cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that on which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Head, top.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cautery treatment for old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain in the rear part of the head, or a dull pain between the temples, the head should be treated with medicines that purify the brain, and the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, then the cautery treatment can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery in medicine that burns be that you take a piece of alder, incinerate it, and abridge the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid into it, where you make the incision and leave the needle, which is to be concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen over the place stopped by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove and draw the alder, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then cover over the spot submerge in balm until the area heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do what with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed according to this manner: ignite the cautery from which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clavicle, for its head has the form of a nail and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the location of the pain, and retract it—so that the artery which is left is not burned—and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is burned due to the strength of the cautery is as great as its size, lift your hand so that the artery is not burned which is left, so that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it near a warm fire, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the end of the knife edge according to the cautery, and beware of cutting the artery in this not very ancient migraine.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery for ancient headache.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a headache as we have said in the previous cure and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not help, and sometimes because the disease is worse than what we have said about the first cautery by medicine or the cautery by fire, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place your hand on the place of the pain along the length where the greatest part of the said lies, or just above it; and after that, for a moment, firmly press that area to make the artery incise and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is weakened and should not be used for chewing, and ensure that the nerve which affects it is not adhered to, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, for in its incision there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or careful; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regulation concerning the flow of blood incident to the artery according to its manner, in this place of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness in the patient that does not tolerate this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have reported, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with conservative methods and another treatment as I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, which is called the puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture near the beginning, and lead it to the environment of the whole ear thus as a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery of the ear gradually more as you have tested the place.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points on the whole ear, and quell it, then cure the places among which they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cautery for the tortura.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tortura which is cured and treated with cautery is none other than due to the qualities of the wind, as we have said in the divisions of the ailments.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the quality that causes dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that quality of tortura with jerras, capipurgi, and guarismes, and find your cure ineffective, then when you treat the malady with three cauteries: the first on the ear, the second a small prick in its temple, and the third on the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the malformed part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is to apply the cautery at the outer part of the ear near the top of the ear, and above a small area on the crown of the head, and elsewhere on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the affected part, and then place your hand over the area where the quantity of the scab has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of the cautery, and it is the specialty of the surgeon, the form of whose practice is described below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Yet more subtle is that you use just a small amount, as if seen; and cover it with a small piece to avoid unnecessary coarseness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then cover the area with what is described and let it heal properly.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said earlier and there is no fever in the patient, then cautery it with four cauteries: especially on all corners of his head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cautery is made according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauteryed on the stomach's opening; and it is more rearward; and then proceed with what you are doing.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cautery for oblivion made by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give to the patient at the beginning large stones and pills of the service decanting.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then place your hand on the head of the patient and cover it with a plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place it there for some moments, as this is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to the method and order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore, if by those means it is cured; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head into the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for a moment, and then proceed with the cautery as described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more heat and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition of heat, then cauterize there above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And proceed with the cautery while it is healing; and let the cautery be in the shape given as shown.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery treatment of ulcers and the moistening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in modification of the head with stones and as we have said; then place near the head of the patient, and with cautery there on the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all horns of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body for more and the illnesses tolerate it and the illness is strong, then cautery there with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterward with a cautery between where the spine meets it, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that where it is healed, and this be an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	 Capitulum.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore cover that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the illness is great and is tolerable the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then for several days beforehand, prepare masticatory remedies that modify the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding method, and another cautery on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerable, then apply the cauteries I have said, having first paralyzed and softened the body around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply olive cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross flame, then apply a cautery using the cauteries we have described, having first paralyzed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink what purifies his brain according to what was previously divided.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And near the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora over the circle on the middle of the head, then place that in the center of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient is lying on his back, and is held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And place the liniment; it is particularly worthy to be applied before sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient can bear when more is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And place it in the middle of the head in the circle, and let it remain until it is rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient once a week. For the other regimen, let it remain until he is cured; or if you wish, make a cautery by making small points according to his condition. Otherwise, keep your hand on an appropriately ordered cautery: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that folded cloth on the side or in the folds of the garment.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery for water descending into the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of it, and keep the other free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that powder in bath with decoction for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to rub his head, and cautery that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cautery that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of ysmen in both heels, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one heel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Place the cautery on all the veins and arteries which are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard yourself from flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with some medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, and caution about flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck with two bones on either side produced properly.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently occur through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious location on the head, and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic discharges, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the beginning of water flowing in the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two towels, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to stitch, then sear that area on the full length of the hairline at the edge of the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cautery treatment for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your treatment for the condition as described in the division does not improve, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient three times the decoction of cochias; and cut his hair, and cautery him with a medium-sized cautery and an olive wood cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cautery that area with a sharp cautery on both hairlines, leaving the hair slightly.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to scorch that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the use of the sharp cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery, and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows with a small one on each side, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted in the inner parts and fistula of the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eye is converted in the inner parts, I probe the eye, and cauterize there according to two methods: either by cautery or by applying burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is from fire, command the patient to lie down in such a way that his skin is exposed as if those who bathe him do, with their hands extended and equal; and when you hold it there, strengthen the edges of it with a bandage so that it does not become inflamed before the skin is grown over it.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when the skin is grown over and extended, place the head of the patient on a pillow, and then press your hand over the edges of the cautery tentatively, marking it in the shape of a laurel leaf, which will be the beginning of the mark on the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place it carefully immersed in oil or mustard on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply the cautery to the marked figure, gradually in small stages, until the surface of the wound is burned, which should appear like a laurel leaf, entirely visible and proper.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the heel already contracted and the hairs of it raised from the puncture of the heel.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and place it over the wound between that the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another time the cautery over that, all as you have done first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is in the eyelid, then cauterize that when it is raised to its natural place and made equal, so that the skin does not cover the heel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to lengthen and make equal the skin, and then form it into the shape of a mulberry leaf using a piece of cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a known soap and fresh lard in one ounce. Mix those ingredients well, do this quickly so it is not rubbed too much; then spread this over a piece of cloth made thus like the leaf of a laurel, and place that over one or both areas; place the patient's buttocks partly immersed in a basin of oil, and the patient's head in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the said over the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is on him thus like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then, to verify that the bite has occurred, let go of the medicine and apply it again in your lap; therefore, when the bite ceases, place the medicine back on and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid is already raised as if washed; if so, apply heat or incision, for then this is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine to the place where it has not yet been applied, without disturbing your operation and contracting the area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the area between which the knot of the adhustio should be eliminated, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it may be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, you should keep careful vigil that no medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened or some cause affects the skin around it in the wound, then repeatedly apply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and do so in the same manner as at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the method for washing the eye.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of humans vary in size and smallness, and therefore your incision should be made according to this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of the right path should not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal gland of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not perform your cure accordingly, then when you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head on your thigh, and let some minister hold the head of the patient between your thighs in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the cautery on the vein in the flesh or over the blister on the sole of the foot.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be cylindrical, like the form of a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it be similar to a needle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nevertheless, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the cautery near the root of the nose, so that your hand does not touch or burn the patient, and then place the cautery on the nostrils and destroy that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if your cautery at the beginning enters the mouth, that is good; and if not, then reapply the cautery one or two times if necessary; and leave it in this manner for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered and scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula which some first doctors will say: find the place of the fistula and do it there and then pause near that fissure like a thin line which is the form of it. Put in there the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and keep your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter through that where the melted lead does not penetrate to that place; and continue to pause over the hole of the bad humor as in album of honey or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals that by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer atra belladonna and reduce the fistula to the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the wound from the boil.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Small cracks often occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then when you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Let the cavity be as per the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that heated cautery precisely in those cracks until it reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms in the tonsil region or on the palate or in the tooth sockets, and then develops into a fistula that breaks open, becomes chronic, or is reformed as a fistula, and your cure is not effective, then heat the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, place the heated cautery in the tract of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its bottom. Do this one or two times at the end. Then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so, if the pus is removed and it is healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the area and fix the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	chapter .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Cauterization of the teeth and mollification of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loose, first treat those with medicines and do not wait. Then place the patient's head in hot water, and soon after, heat the cautery to the form which will be given shortly. Try to pause the cautery over the tooth and insert it into that area vigorously, keeping the cautery there just a little while so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times as you see fit.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should close their mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then spit it out, as the loose tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a swelling or you cannot achieve relief with medicine, then the cautery for that area can be performed in two ways: either with a calf's horn cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The calf's horn cautery is when you take the horn of a calf and blisters that part with iron, then take the blistered part and wrap it around the end of the probe, and immerse that in the blistered horn, placing it over the painful tooth forcefully to ensure it becomes inflamed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly do this several times to ensure the virtue of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the horn mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth, and hold the ignited iron over it until the iron permeates to the root of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, however, the cautery with fire, you must attend to the shape of the wound or iron, and in its core there should be some coarse material so that the acuity of the fire does not reach the opening of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then shape the cautery in the form that will come, and place that one on the tooth and put your hand between it so that the cautery is well rubbed; and do this several times to prevent the pain from worsening or on that day or the other.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that due to the effect of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth properly and keep it this way for about an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cautery it where you will stop according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery treatment for protrusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the hernias are filled with phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you have lightly digested those with medicine, then apply the cautery to the form of which this follows: having two open extremities so that smoke arises from one end through the other, and place that ignited cautery over that apostema for one minute, and another if needed until it reaches the root of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and after three days, place it over the center where the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply ointment and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery should be as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol. xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	For the cautery treatment of hoarseness and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidity in the venous channel of the lung is present, especially when it is due to a cold constitution, then you should evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and immediately cauterize the vein in the swollen area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not apply the cautery to the vein nor burn the ligament of the lung, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the rear vertebra of the lung.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for the lung should be applied according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with what was preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity, and the patient has no fever or tuberculosis and is suffering from an old ailment, then cauterize it with two cauteries over the furcula at the swollen areas of the thighs and groins; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot area between the two breasts; and apply the cautery to the neck according to the form previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery puncture with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the puncture into the cells for those; and then cure that with what you apply when it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery having three prongs; for this cautery, you can make three punctures in one go according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not immobilized in the hour of its return, you should reduce the dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then by a small movement, it will be dislocated as it tries to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; then elevate the codena which is in the inner part of the citillic to the outer parts above the thumbs of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain where that penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two heads cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and do that subtlety according to the quantity of the tumor; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because these cauteries are VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery some salt for several seconds, and then attach the patient to a stretcher, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the thumb is treated, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is caused by wet humors that extract from its composition and multiply within it, and if your therapeutic methods continue without success, then you will see that the disease is on his back expanding, extending its hands and things. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one at the heel with a cautery of the size of a thumb, and two at the sides of the cautery, forming the shape of a triangular cautery; leave a space between those not closely applied to avoid scab formation.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach by puncturing where it is scared by this cautery: and you touch the stomach with a pointed cautery according to the quantity you desire, and then cauterize that area with points; and cure that with the therapy that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery of the sore foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the foot occurs due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has affected its natural structure through an excess of superfluous exit, and if the ill state is not relieved as we have said, then cover the foot with what we have mentioned and do not confine it, and instead ensure that the foot is raised above the level of the hip bones, and often try three cauteries in this manner and with this quantity applied to the foot below the hips, letting the person lie on their back.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right side of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not apply the cautery too strongly or for too long.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the cautery's tip, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then lie down, which has already extended its parts, and raise their hips.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you may use this cautery with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are required.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard that you do not overheat in the cauterization, so that the subtlety of the entire cord is sealed, ensuring the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for here the cord is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the Perforation of an Abscess on the Foot with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess on the foot and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences a severe and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is severe and often so intense that it exhausts even the doctors with their treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then ensure that the patient is lying on their back; and place the spot where the abscess is to be incised with a tent; and heat the cautery which resembles a wand, the shape of which was shown in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize there and within until the entire chain be burned, until it reaches the cyst, until in healthy flesh.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that by curing the other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And ensure that this cautery used is one that the physician has studied in the art of medicine and in which he has had many experiences of maladies; but from these experiments, some times it has been heated for this operation, but otherwise leave the other to me, as it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery for plague.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for plague was made by roughening the surface of an iron rod according to this method. This is what you should do: take from the rough iron rods one long strip, which is about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that area which is between the continuation of the furcula towards the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclining to the side where the beard begins, and with two cauteries in what is inclining between the fifth rib and the pelvis, inclining slightly towards the rear sides; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the rear sides; and one cautery in that area which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries from the two outer sides of the foot, place the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And make sure your hand is not on the cautery, but rather in the middle of the electrode in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery made of iron resembling a ray and burn that, and place it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is thoroughly healed, as we have said for the abscess of the groin.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	More in this perforation of the cautery there is no fear, for he will soon occur at the place where the fistula does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the sore.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the sore, as we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, the cautery on it is according to three ways, all of which are correct. Of these, one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the sore, following the figure of the cautery iron, the figures of which have been shown before.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the thickness between each cautery should be that of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the method as we have said for the cautery iron.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient be over its back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery with two flammable substances, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the middle of the seam so that it permits the passage of the left thigh's jazer.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cautery can be applied according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two flammable substances, ignited mote, into that space where you penetrate the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cautery marks.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you do, cauterize with the cautery heated by three flammable substances.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery when it has been allowed to burn for too many days, as this is more conducive than the other preceding causes in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cautery for hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used for hydrocele but for the area properly affected.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division. Do not deviate from your cure; instead, use four cauteries around the swelling and one on the stomach, another on the flanks, another on the back, two between the spinal vertebrae, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be approximately that of a needle.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And leave the cautery open so that it heals over for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the ill side during the cure near the cautery where it should be added two incisions, and it will be assisted by a healing remedy.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should be oblong according to the form described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared as described previously in its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow bile, make a cautery treatment on the feet over the arch of the foot near where it is between the ankle and the toe, and lift your hand from the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand, and do not return it entirely, as the yellow bile drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is to be done as follows: And over each thigh, make two cauteries, and on each thigh place the cautery at the end of the surgical blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one end of the cautery at the top of the thigh and the other end in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the ailments which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity that penetrate into its weakness, this involves the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines. This is treated according to the methods of treatment, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of vital virtue. Therefore, perform the cautery on that with a large cautery over their own stomach as described previously in the cauterization of the stomach, using the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the circuit of the fine fibers, using a fineawl cautery; or use a large cautery over aloes, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then perform the cautery over the pentelich and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the youth of the quality from which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured as we said in the division, and you do not apply your heated cure, then cauterize three times on the pus spot below the two small triangular bones, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food he eats is not digested, and his face appears flushed, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the armpit, and another on the groin with a cylindrical cautery. Let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery treatment near the site of excision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the artery, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into the incised artery, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if there are more veins, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments on them until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, treat it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is some fistula in the nature behind and it is ancient, corrupted by good health and moisture, therefore what is most fitting that you test is to use a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the front said probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted vessels burn up thoroughly one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you realize it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area once it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are separated from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you can see that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not held away from it, then you can see that they are penetrating or in the vicinity of the wound causing corruption, or this comes from one of those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol.xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterizing the warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts hurt due to cold or excessive dryness, and thus the patient's pain is diminished, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery over each wart using aawl of which you will recall the procedure.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize with the second a little more, because three line cauteries will follow, and thus they will be deeper in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol.xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cautery the bladder in that part, starting where the skin of the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be applied according to how it is done.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cautery of the meatus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous congestion and humidity in the meatus, and for this reason, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstrual flow is disrupted or delayed, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said when discussing the bladder cautery; and apply a cautery over the lower part of the foot, or use two cauteries, and ensure that the cautery is applied properly.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.-xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors infiltrate the region of the ankle, and are causes of displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other leg when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is applied to the outer side of the foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cautery the ankle of the foot with a circular cautery, as you have marked around the region in the form of a circle as it is turned, so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the cautery as described above is used in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three large olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be applied according to the intensity of the pain throughout the limb; and then care for that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol. xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain in the leg occurs and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said and you do not apply, and this is outdated. Instead, let the patient suffer from large humors by using stinking pills or artificial ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with a flame.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Sir according to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area over the back of the leg with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the spacing between each cauterization should be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cauterization in the middle of each location on the back of the leg, as there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cautery the circle around which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cautery for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended to the thigh, then cautery both areas on the thigh around the location where you will return the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the cylindrical part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the circumference.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if you return the ankle where the pain is extended near the base of the toes, then cautery that area with three or four or more points if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle returns pain to be felt in the thigh, then cautery that area with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or great artery, and because of this you are badly affected or contract something.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen others who cauterized on the nail and ended with the cautery, and the bed was inflamed between where the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follows a severe colic, and often death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery for gout, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its holes be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the joint of the foot; and may those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those slots be one joint or two joints, and make at those iron margins decently fitted into the circles; this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approximately it is ignited in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, and then it is placed on the part of the foot, the gout colletted over the sole.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be for three days; and apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have little used this kind of cautery for the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few things regarding it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More from the good cautery for him who suffers it, and find it in that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More, a cautery with adhering medicines consists of making two circles having a perforated frame in which the smoke from the iron door is placed; let the length of the walls in their thickness be two nuts or quarters.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each part of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened and below, and contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the ankle where the patient is lying, and hold your hand over the part of the ankle; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be like fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and sticking of it — since that empty space bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all around the ankle with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the stuck state fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is derier in juvenescence.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or the leg, make an incision in it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water caudation, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for a fire not extinct from both parts one, trim the ashes in a new cauldron of which the part left is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of another cauldron over the heated one, and pour water gently over the live alkali and ashes so that they are covered by an inch, and then take those up with your hand for good compression, and let the water droplets from the sharp water fall into the part left in the heated cauldron.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live alkali and renewed ashes, for which that will be of strong acuity, the which is administered in most operations of medicine and in cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of some medicines that are coagulated wide, such as tesselice and mel anacrete, it is tried that they be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts an operation and cure of an ancient man suffering from water pain and sciatic vein pain. The doctor magnified the good deed and said no other treatment was necessary, for he was cured in one session as recommended, for his condition improved greatly with baths and exercises as instructed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be applied with a warm compress, and if no warm compress is available, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be tied with a few threads and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left in place for three hours or until the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in bath water, and when the patient's body is warmed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that no use of cautery in these medicines should be made except near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May I also state that when making a cut in the sinew vein, cauterizing it will make it heal better; and the way to use the cautery is: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the layers of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And place a cut in the dry wool and immerse it in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it expand.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and continue doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and pauses the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of using the cautery is called the calf cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol. xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two sides is caused by multiple reasons, such as compression or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not used for burning but only in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, open, and place evacuating pills near the affected side where the pain is located, three lines in length according to the width of the area. Also, apply cauterization or more if signs indicate on each line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cauterization.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And apply the cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, apply the cauterization with three or four cauteries using a medial-pointed cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol. xliv.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions observed in this illness among small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulties with their structure during play, sleep, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the spine and those nearby that they are beginning to overgrow the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then sear it with a cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, sear around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And place it over the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in convulsion caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a manner of treatment and not relieved by remedies, but rather by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you do so by cautery at the location of the joint on the foot with pointed cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise to the toes or other joints, and you must treat this, then cautery the affected toe with three or four points using the olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if burns from the cautery that these cauteries be necessary for you, then cauterize that part and do not press too much your hand against the cautery before, only around the size of a cone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the ankle and shin, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the toes and it is called cramp, then prick along the circumference of the tendons as they revolve, pricking in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick along the circumference of the tendons on each finger and on the back of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the bladder properly and with the reception of medicines, then even if good regimen and flux are done, this cauterization will be sufficient for healing, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are seen in front of the hernia sack at the genetival region, and this begins to appear nearby, then when you order the patient to leave his meal for that day and use soothing remedies so that the opening of his abdomen decreases.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands over his groin, and command him to keep his legs together until the swelling goes down or the sack or intestines become visible.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return those points in the thighs and touch the rupture over the bone of the femur, marking the extremity of which seems like the diameter of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery with which this is the form of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is heated hot and glows with sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and place it in the middle of the thigh; repeat this on another side if you have not successfully placed it in the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the position of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not burn it, so that no harm comes to the patient or great evil occurs.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as it will affect your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the place of the cautery for three days among that the scar of the fire wound heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that you nourish him according to the length of time for his cure, so that the intestine does not come out. You must make great efforts to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to lift him after 10 days, properly apply a plaster, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should rest and replenish his food and drink, and use strong voices. For when he follows this regimen for complete recovery, he will surely be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, and if they do not tear further, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; this is what is drawn from the cord in the same way as the tender part of it. Then care for it as we have said, and it is not sutured.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And place a line there for the width in the slashes above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a triangular cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of the fistula.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in certain limbs persists due to inflammation or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the size and nature of the cautery should be according to the magnitude and smallness of the fistula, its virtue and development, and the location and pain associated with it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if the fistula is cured by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, those pains are punctured in a nearby limb to achieve the cautery where the disease lies until the fistula is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and of that kind cured as we have said in the division and neither this nor that. Then fear that the corruption may encompass all of his body and all of his composition; therefore, cauterize that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, leave the second space from it, place the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or shoulder.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with the cautery a little inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, so that the scabs are displaced, thereby alleviating the expiration of gross vapors; cauterize on the tongue according to necessity.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you cauterize there and those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on the two mammary glands, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one on the spine, and on two on the hips, and one on each hip, and on two on the knees, and one on each knee, and on two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on his foot bones; cauterize there over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the knuckles of his toes.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as directed by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with a mixture of roasted flour and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. liv.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes parts of the body, such as the head and feet, and the spinal columns on both sides are cauterized, and the vision of the nerves which run through that member is impaired, and the stupor is aggravated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this, but only those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cauterization of ulcers that become morphew.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and you do not apply any of the medicines' ointments to them, then cauterize over that with a cautery, proceeding according to the quantity of the paste of the cochenil. Let the white and the color of it be remedied, and its color be changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is anoint with flour of ergot and lentils in roasted oil and leaves of rosemary, or pigeon droppings or turkey droppings, each having one part, all being mixed together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the knee.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circumference of the area as it is revolved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle spot; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper to cauterize in the circumference of the area with a circle as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for ulcers.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some ulcers are delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess fluid making them so, or due to the patient's condition, who is old and decrepit, or has little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cauterize in the circumference of the ulcer with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave those that will mature on their own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: then place it in the middle of the affected area where the needle will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure that which will be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a gradual corruption in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where a fire-cautery is to be applied, then ignite the cautery with a few large and hot coals, according to what is appropriate for that particular location affected by corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And allow that for three days, and place a hot cautery on the areas previously cauterized only after all the sores have been completely eradicated and all corruption removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And treat that with ointment generating flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good. But if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are rotten in the corrupted spots.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And after treating with some medicines several times using sharp medicine, which is half the treatment of a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, a cautery with fire is more beneficial for slight wounds.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already explained the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.lix.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of wounds and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Small stones placed in the painful parts of the foot which are called clavus, and it is a large, penetrating injury that affects the foot; and cautery there is done in two ways, one with fire and one with water-caused cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery with fire is to heat the concave cautery resembling a backward hook, which is made of iron according to the quantity that can contain the stone from all parts, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that heated cautery over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it be there for three days until it begins to blister.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice to it with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that the stone is removed from its place.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If they are not converted, and motas (small blisters or lesions) occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then when you administer cautery with water, take a quannaula of elm or iron or a cinder stick, place it over the nail; then put some water in the quannaula, withdraw your hand, and move that with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing the margin of the quannaula on the root of the nail, and you will find the water flowing through the hole of the nail; wait for the patient a little while after the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then remove that, as the nail will have its roots eroded.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same to those and then the other, until you come over all of which they have in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those pustules where the nail roots have been eradicated by applying ointments on which the flesh will regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When an ache or tremor occurs due to friction in the nerves or from fever of a similar cause, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over his stomach, using an olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor in him subsides, and recovery from the illness follows.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for ailments affecting the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body abscesses have formed and pustules have developed, which are made of thick corrupted materials; then at the beginning as they appear, the fistula should be cauteryed with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an herb from erestologia longua; or with a flat cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they do not believe it, making those who are diseased healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	More over I must say that this should be done near the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery treatment for flux from an injury due to arterial incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often when flux from an artery is incised, the wound which needs to be lanced, or from the incision of an abscess or cautery on the member, it appears, and is difficult to heal.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then when such a case occurs, you hold your hand over the orifice of the artery, and place it there firmly until the flow of blood stops, then remove your hand, and let it not leak.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the olive cautery in the fire for a few large and small puffs, by number many times, and blow on them until they are well heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein pressing strongly as you have previously tied, and hold the cautery close so that it is narrowed and restricted that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the hole of the artery when you tie it and narrow the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries which are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another so that the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood flow using a cautery in this manner, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, which when it is extracted, its ends are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or it is tied with filth or with resin by strong tension, or it is paused over medicines from which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be tightly bound with a pulvinar in a proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers proper restraint to it with flax and with tension of cloths or by the position due to burning causes and similar ones, does not relieve it so well.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if he needs to do so for someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open it carefully with his finger over the orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the sore has been left from the upper part of the wound, and on the archery, let the finger not be removed; and above the archery, sprinkle water mixed with a strong flegmative while the sore is congealed and swollen; and more apply heat in case cauterization or medical necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and fistulas and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and phlebotomy, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those of the forms of cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subiranetat of the cap between the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved of what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, hear, sons, that in this chapter what is treated pertains to the fear of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And hear, that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, motes of catz evacuation are used, which if it is a case where life is at stake, you should perform the aspersio of the vein or incision on the apostema or accretion, or excision or purgation of the wound or extraction of the arrow or incision of the abscess, and operations similar to these.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these, there is always fear and trembling, and in the most serious cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in cases of fainting, for in some instances, your methods may be mistaken for the methods of those who are unskilled.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will go to their illness and die, this due to the intensity of what they find from their illness, and for the length of the illness, and in the illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those, the ones who give you their ache and tell, you expecting that their health will improve, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you must consent to only those who come to you, of which this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and to which a successful outcome brings praise.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients based on their prognosis and indication of where health is converted; for in that you have assistance in gaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God imparts His understanding to you and does not withhold direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have also arranged this chapter distinguishing it into chapters as previously described in the chapter on cautery, concerning the cure from head to foot, so that you may be aided by what you ask for and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother's strength strengthens the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appears for hidden causes that are unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I have seen, it has led to death, so I have been left with the work of treating them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head remained always swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and more because the humidity increased inside leading to death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is added either between the tendon and the bone, or it is caused by placing the bone on the cushion.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And if the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, you should make a slit in the middle of the lesion in a width, such that the length of the slit allows the humidity to drain, and this is the form of the incision:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here you should make two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign of this is that you will see the edges of the lesion open completely, and the water oozes out when you press it with your hand on the inner parts; this is not what you want to hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the humidity is between the tendon and the bone, you should make three slits in the middle of the lesion in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And quickly extract all the humidity; then strengthen the slits with bandages and feathers; on the fifth day, pour oil over them; remove the dressing and cure the wound with lint and ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which consideras regarding the size of the abscess and the collection of water; for in some instances it may be more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so according to what is most convenient for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to let blood from the patient by that flow of blood for the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hemorrhages.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When we encounter a catarrh or wound in the ears or foot, this is an ancient practice, and you should not rely on the treatment of medicines for it; rather, the proper treatment involves incising these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incise those that the malady root has its head, then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the malady with some cloth; and consider where lies the vein; and the places over which lie the auricles pressing, and they are hidden in almost all men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press over the artery with your finger, and incise each one with a sharp knife along the path of the vein, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the knife leaving the artery and cut it at the points above its divisions.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when a vein is cut, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which bursts forth with frequent spurts.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space of three fingers, and press there with your finger, and make the incision into the flesh.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one uncia, and much or little it flows, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the distension of the artery of the leg.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then incise it so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and cloth lint, and then cure that by applying ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute migraine occurs due to damp conditions and the quality of the air in the temples, or if it is a strong old pain similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and this does not relieve you, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men through the violence of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then lift the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you burn the artery with that as facilitated until you reach the artery; and then get onto it with oil and extract that to the upper parts while you withdraw that from the codena and discover that of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is thin, then wrap it at the extremity of the oncia, and then incise a part according to the quantity for which the extremities of the oncia are lengthened and contracted, and no flux of sand will be found, for if not incised, the sand will not rise from there.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the vein one. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must divide it into two places with a firm double fold of each or with long cords, and do not touch it until putrefaction occurs before the consolidation of the wound and ensure the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between two threads; and do this at that time or shortly thereafter.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical knife at the points where the threads are cut; and this will take the place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is of cold nature; for a cautery is of those causes that help in expelling humidities, and therefore it is better in convalescence.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And you must then make the extraction of the arteries that you have placed in a proper location, and they should be packed over with properly made dry powders, and be covered with medicinal plasters until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, with a cautery or by filling the place with cotton, and firmly hold your hand to restrict the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any of those reasons it is not at your present, then hold your hand over the area until the bleeding stops, and apply the place with water of strong refrigeration until the heat calms down, and strengthen as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two places with hot probes, and hold burning coals over them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it can be extended, which are not consolidated by this entire cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of the two knives be sufficient.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the pain is acute as if cut by two knives, near each cautery, and you do not incise the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is some swelling, keep the heat of the fire on those areas and the flesh is incised slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better in all works and more slight.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for feet with acute and sour tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are sour tears, and the body is from the veins which are on the sole of the foot, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on his forehead as if it were being walked on by ants, and the feet become weak and softened so that their skins are well known, and the eyelids are scalded by the acuteness of the tears, they should use the old method in the cure of those for this operation, and number that cure among the passing things.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin that is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal gland, and the third on another part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers, adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths at hand, place them over which to dry the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, the form of which is the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the place between the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Exsorve all the fluid that is between two incisions along the crest which is above the bone, and then do the same for the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then scrape this exudate and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then place the blade of the scalpel against the adjacent flesh, open the ligament, and the blade inside the bone. Insert it there until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More importantly, continue the incision to where the ligament appears, and then do the same in the middle fissure between the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after the bleeding has equalized, express the areas of the ankles with a concave tool.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand over any gouty crack in the old skin, and place it above those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a strong infusion of walnut or hazel water, and then cure what is ointed with basilicum oil and others so that the wounds may heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those drooping from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a severe and continuous catarrh, and the tears from the eyes are small and diminished, and their look shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the skin around them is affected, and in the forehead there is acute pain along with an extreme swelling, then you can judge that the humors and catarrh do not come from the internal vessels originating within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in such cases is this: you should command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small crack right through the center of the forehead. Start from the left temple between the two temples; the incision should be into the bone, extending your hand along the ridges of the temples, which are prominent, and should involve thorough excision of the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the fissure with a piece of old cloth or a dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen it further with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you uncover this and see that the abscess has diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh grow, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to wither, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it in these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the cure for what catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that catches in the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron or flint, or it is from plant matter such as dust or bean pods, or it is a fluid cause such as water or wine and substances similar to them, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when purgation occurs in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor swell in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the foot, then it distills in some cause of olive oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are likely caused by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not caused by motas, then perform the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is caused by motas, that is good; otherwise, then perform the extraction of it with a fine onci of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not caused by motas, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and olive oil made milder so that it does not open except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the bowels with strong traction, for too many views as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not extracted in this manner, then take some alummed salt or vinegar apparatus on which the organs are placed a quantity of paws, place that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap about that corner decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the channel of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not extracted by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to excise that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of excising it is that at the beginning you mark the patient's leg from the thigh to the knee according to the virtue of the vein, and then make a cut between your fingers and convert the ear to its upper parts, and make a small fissure in the cartilage of the ear and insert the grey matter there.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the crack be of lunar shape through which it reaches the heel, and if the heel is infected, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, over that crack at that time apply velocity, and cure it within the time it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause settles in the ear, it is one of those oils that plug and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your application, then take fine thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer the extraction of that oil which is embedded in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and properly extract it in those areas or with a subtle gesture, or by incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses for sneezing at the onset of illness, and fills their ear with some old oil or vinegar, place it on that ear where is the water, and if by this is forced out, well; otherwise, then take small pebbles of iron or lead according to the length of the finger, heat those in the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the tube of their ear and jump over a piece of that part and strike it with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying leeches until all the water has been drawn out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been sufficiently drawn out, take either paper or wax, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end in fire until the wax is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another wax and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been drawn out, and remove that with a cannula as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of matter entering that ear, if it is a small mass, proceed similarly and treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a large mass that appears prominently within, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, and the cause of it is less significant compared to all other causes that appear in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	More in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the tractatus de distillacions, and if your treatment does not seem to be effective, then look into the ear with the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here appears any cause of worms, then extract that with a gesture or fine forceps, but if no such cause appears, then take a cannula and open it wide, for this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	I insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then I suck it out by strong suction, performing this many times until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey to your assistance, then you open and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, for this is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or gold, straight, with a small hole in it, and a flat surface on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be done to ensure that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you desire into the catheter — which is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand on it with a gentle compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused into the ear should already be heated over a small fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you will distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children contract abscesses in the flesh of their ears from their mothers' non-perforated navels, and this occurs in some adults as well, with an abscess forming in the ear meat due to a wound or without any apparent cause; sometimes this abscess forms in the preauricular area which does not show external signs, and at other times it forms in the outward parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the prepuce of him, which does not involve the visible part, is in the major disposition for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see the part, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an obvious swelling, open the small incision under which this swelling is located:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity in which the width is small, where one part is acute and the other is not; and the swelling is of two lion's teeth so that it does not irritate the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the prepuce of the ear, then take a thin lion's tail and heat that wire slightly in fire, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you sense an abundance of what the patient has in sufficiency due to the weight of excretion, relieve the oppression by facilitating evacuation; and make sure not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cloth in the ear according to the amount of the swelling which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you infuse it in water and pulverize it over the dry trissa and use it; and if you see the ear already perforated, then clean it thoroughly and change the liquid with another one which you wrap in a cloth made of rubbed oil, until the abscess is reduced; and cure it as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a blood flow occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out, and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Eyelids that occasionally become moist, and some become dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then ensure that you have those hand towels or sponges, and wipe away the foam from their mouths, and place your hands over these areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of hot blood, then cauterize those areas with a thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery treatment is near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their bleeding; and when they are cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care for inflammation of the eyelids caused by hot blood.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Spots appear in the eyelids caused by some cause which is similar to inflammation in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called inflammation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And this is an addition of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in it where it appears from the eyelid and is felt throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a fissure there for the width, and then probe it thoroughly with a probe to facilitate drainage, and lift that and cut it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have an instrument to start it, so that you must penetrate the eyelid with a small incision gradually, then do not notice any cause for this.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is decreasing within the parts of the eyelid, you should reduce the inner surface, then probe the eyelid and lift the enlargement with a probe, another that you choose for incision, and press it thoroughly. If the eyelid by incision is stretched, then do not notice any cause for this.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and dress the area with a bandage until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the treatment of excoriation above the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excoriation is caused by grays that are generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates the ulcers in them and affects their catarrh, potentially leading to death; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun due to this, which causes tears to flow into those areas.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this, you frequently apply them on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces covered. And only on the eyelids of their cheeks do they have wet eyebrows, which already show swelling and the apparent presence of excoriation in the ulcer; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you can feel the excoriation within those areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that the patient rests their head on your hand, and then cover them with a cloth. Make a compress according to the quantity it contains powder from all parts, and place it over that and press with your thumbs so that the excoriation is added at the center of the circle, and then in the middle of that wetness let the vapor incident through a crack according to its width, such that the crack is no larger than the crack made in a ventroscopy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding cavity where you cut the cord completely until you reach arcernach, for in the later operations proceed with arcernach through a crack according to the form of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those from the sheets which you have wrapped around your thumbs and revolve between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not press on the crack so that you do not damage the sphincter and loosen it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if your alternach does not appear at the beginning of the crack, then press a small piece of fecilitat into the crack as you proceed with alternach; then extract those as we have said; and then margin draps of linen in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then anoint with salt and place it in the cavity of the crack to remove what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in that location, then cure it by applying medicated plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When there are natzez (swellings) in the eyelids of the eye, caused by a tight fit of the natural skin and becoming hard, then those noso (nerves) of the eye become ways of ailments such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue until this is the cause of destruction of the eye. This condition is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as previously said in the Capitol of cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or by cantharides as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so hold the head of the patient in your left hand; then place the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it can be turned, good. Otherwise, insert a needle into the one where the thread is attached at the base of the eyelid, and push the needle with thread above, and let it penetrate—near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises—and through the skin, and pull the thread up over the eyelid, then turn it back.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then place the skin tightly against the stream of secretion from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland; and remove the humors and place fine powder of coto or cloth dust on the eyelid, and cover the eyelid with a tent, as if it were the shape of a mirt leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But I must observe that the shape should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies in women, for those in whom a large amount of secretion from the eyelid is required according to the degree to which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place the stream along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the angles of the incision, and scrape the entire area, and close the two edges with a stitch using gut or fine wool thread, and clean the wound, and adhere what remains from the threads on two sutures for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and otherwise, leave it untreated.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, let the wound of the veins heal in three or four days, and then cure this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound heal without suturing, and cure that which dries and contracts, for when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply the sealing of the wound and its incorporation; but suture is better. Therefore, so say the ancients.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if it is tense in the patient, and is of good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of healing is to figure the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separating and bringing together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, have the needles, and this is unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads equally, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it was marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with a stitch, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to make an incision or a fissure, sew that apostema with thread and keep it clean, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes on the eyelid, its skin should be converted. Then use the incision that we have said; but stitch in a few places more artificially.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat burns according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two cannas or two thin astelas whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width a third of the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add a thin layer over what you have excised from the eyelid, and tighten the cannas of each part with strong tension, and leave it for some days. As the knot by the tension will die and become rejected, it will fall off as it heals itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut the threads, and immediately cure the wound while it is fresh.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when the swelling subsides, lift the eyelid and do not prick the skin.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two canes as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of pricking skin, use an awl when the skin is taut.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard, rough, and pricking, in the operation for this, you should use a fine awl and place it on that fine thread. Then, carefully adjust the ends of the thread in a very delicate manner using small clamps.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another fine thread and place it briefly, using the ends of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a towel, and near the sun so that your work be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the edge of the cut skin, adjusting it with forceps, and make that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while extracting that from above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upwards and insert it into the incision, with one or two or three pieces of skin and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand there so that the skin is outwardly moved with forceps in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	More if the skin is grasped with forceps and not moved outward, grasp the skin at the edges with the needle you have prepared, so that when the forceps are removed, the skin will be left behind.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And place the bandage where you can see the wound, for then you will hold the lint and dip it in the dressing, and clean every part thoroughly, leaving the wound open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it there, or leave it until it grows to an appropriate length, and then elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of an elevation in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is an elevation in the wound, and it is caused by a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the right or left side due to poor healing of a lesion or section or cautery, it is called leporine. This elevation can be either natural or accidental, and is caused by the consolidation of a lesion or sections or cauteries, or resembles them in its condition.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it at what is between those one leaf of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not forget that you use the cure of it from the causes which desiccate, constrict; for if you do so return to exacerbate even more evil than there was before any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as fenugreek, and steep it in water in which it is high and seed of it, or ointment of aloe, which be liquefied by some of the oils, and immerse that leaf in it, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate all that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a correction of exacerbations that do not return the form of the area as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the cure of ahcration which is done in the eyelid, let it be known.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ahcration which is done in the eyelid, which is named naturally ahcration; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More commonly, it is caused by a wound or a cut or a cautery or other similar reasons.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	For the operation, you should take a needle and make a double thread, place that needle in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a broad blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the torn figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two cracks at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and from them an angle is made such that when they are gathered together it forms a figure of them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then close the flesh there with the amount that is the length of the sharp point left from it, which is the edge.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with the thread of wool; and then cure them with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plasters until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise further through a crack or suture or cautery, then you must make an incision along a flat line on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on incising when above or left over, let it flow in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of incising, and that is in the form of diverse spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans at all times prepare means in every manner which is possible for him to cause the figure to return to its natural form or near it, and that malformed condition according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the sharp edge of a needle between the eyelid, leave the eyelid, and elevate it or extend it onto the upper lid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a fine needle, which should not be of great sharpness, having a slightly obtuse tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the fluid so that it does not affect the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it separates the adhesion easily so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then place in it enough salt water to wash with; or boil it with juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in honey, and for the first day use conservative treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the flesh of the lacrimal gland.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, and it is like a thin hard thread; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is easily divided and no part of the cut is left in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland where it slowly covers the eye and prohibits both light and movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of treating the incision is that the patient places his head in the supine position, then opens his eyes, raises his eyelid with your hand, and subsequently picks up the corner of the skin with an instrument and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert either a horsehair or a bull's hair or a cow's hair, or similar hair, or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle and place it in the middle of the skin, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the skin with thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and scrape off the hair from the skin which heals the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you follow that with the hair to the back of his neck.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you make the incision in the groove of the lacrimal gland with a fine needle or small scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that by this incision it does not develop continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the thumb is placed on the sole of the extended foot or on venom, as we have said, and then it is excised with lion's tooth, which is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the lion's tooth you do not touch the cornual membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a little salted honey or of vinegar made from wine, and leave it there for another day; and take care that what is applied within heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the thumb is not nerveous and you cannot put the needle in it, then treat this kind of thumb with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the space in the thigh and take a sharp lion's tooth of heated steel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	of fine steel.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and confined within the ulcer, then distill from your mouth into the wound of flesh made of syrian or hemp wool or salted silk, and apply the other end to this one.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then perform the operation on it until all of it is removed, but if a counter-pustule forms in the wound, then leave that and treat the beginning of the pustule until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then continue your operation on it until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the tear flesh, if noticed in the wound by great damage, suspend it with a needle; and incise that part, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the tear duct wool or syrian wool until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of algazardenic and of that which has arisen from flesh joined in the whole.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In the heels of some, there arises fleshly growths that are covered over, situated near or strengthened against the eyelids and lightly binds the eyelids to the parts outside, being assembled close to the cheek.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More importantly in this operation is that the patient places their head on a pillow; and then open the heels of that person and collect all that flesh with convenient incisions, using forceps or tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning before everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep watch over the wound to ensure you do not lose track of it for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made in the manner we have described in the incision of the thumb, or with small scissors using which the flesh is collected according to the form that will come in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, once your incision is completed and the entire flesh is reddened, fill the wound with salted salve, or sprinkle it with a powder of rogar similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place a wax pledget over the wound outside until an abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there arises any cause for guardency and is seared with caut, and fears apostema caut, then leave the whole and cure that apostema by what yields that apostema, and then iterate over that with operation between that be healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the healing of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Moreover, however, you must know that you should allow all healing of the wound by natural means or by accidental means, prepare with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of knowledge in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Surgery shows us veins that are prominent on the wound and prohibits their operation, and they expand the wound over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which surgery is to be performed is strong and if there is no other illness in it. Then, you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your discretion; and let that inch be of subtle doubling according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	and the two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads, with subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while urging those veins to remain open and be rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be sure that you do not let the blood reach the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the middle of the day before the sun, be firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the wound vinegar or rancid oil to make what is open from the scab acrid.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible in that hour, then plaster everything with what relieves the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is relieved and an abscess secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over it according to how the patient manipulates it as it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forks:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	For the reduction of hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of its history precedes and it is not cured, then do not perform any operation on it. Instead, if there is an abscess, wait for it to mature, and then drain all the moisture within it, and once the pus is revealed, expose the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness appears within it, then treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "sharp head," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, holding it such that it is made with points by filing or delicately punctured (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place him over the corrupt part of the bone, then return that between the thighs called, and press your hand little by little so that you know that that corruption is flat.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let this be done several times, then restore the area caused by drying and constricting factors.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and has good hidden flesh and the diseased tissue is cut from the body and heals over forty days, and does not renew or become gangrenous and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you shall uncover the bone with an iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take three strips according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the iron be triangular, and the shaft be narrowed towards the end in this manner as you see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place it over the bone, and let that be close to the lacrimal; then extend your hand a little along its length, and return your hand with the strips so that they penetrate the entire bone, and that feels the patient's pain through the air that passes by when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they are accustomed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the matter which was effusing to the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the foot, subsequently apply scarification and bleeding at the neck six times, then place cold liniment made of acacia, aloe, eniset, and resin over it, and finally strengthen the poultice on the heel with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is that you take cloths soaked in oil of lions, and each cloth be folded into four parts; then use those folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of what they need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen those with a hard cloth bandage; and repeat the cups with suction several times; and place the cups, leaving them tight all day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then leave it slightly stretched.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the ligament tightly both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and then this prominence protrudes and proceeds outward like a degree of swelling, and its shape resembles that of a person. If you wish to incise it, the operation on it is as we have recommended. You should insert the needle into the margin of the uveal membrane from one side to the other, just above where you left off. Then place another needle at the lacrimal part with a double thread, and allow the latter to penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position. Next, incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uveal membrane in the circuit of the needle, then strengthen it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place yourself over the wound filled with honey album and let the thread be in it until it dissolves.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the wound with what comforts him in which the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth under the wound, and then let a fine needle be perforated through the cloth to the bottom of the wound, allowing the humidity albuminosa to drain and descend, and exit soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcers is nothing but putrefaction which settles in the wound resembling running water and is not the other.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the ulcer on a clean, straight surface, and then hold its edges with your fingers in two parts, and move those parts where you see the putrefaction reach the parts left, and then dry it so that it does not descend, and keep the light, allowing the ulcer to see the causes as one sees.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent to the wound is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient lie on their back and proceed with suctioning a fine tube over the conjunctiva onto the cornea into the place vacant, so that the water is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And since the water is expelled, then you administer the distilled water into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure for water descending into the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is to be used for perforation as we declared, according to its nature.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And you must make the patient lie on their back on a couch and keep their wound clean with it, using astringent material.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye; if the lid is on the left side, use your left hand; or with your right hand, if the lid is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the flannel, if the lid is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the lid is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the flannel near the cornea for the swelling of the vein in the white of the eye on the side of the lower eyelid, and then apply the flannel with virtue and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the flannel is already saturated with fluid.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the length of the flannel when removed, comparing it to the size of the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the dark part, which is the cornea; for you will see the pupil through the eye with the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand in the location where there is water, and then you lower it down one time or another. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then see the patient below where his sight can reach quickly, and your hand confirms this.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you lower it again one more time before your hand is slipped out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and slowly rotate your hand around, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in the water and with that wash inside; then place outside the solution a clot or stop or infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie this with it the solution inside.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	More importantly, those of our times tie it with olive oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your hand does not fit into the solution due to its hardness — which is often the case with some men whose hands are thick — then you must take the spume which is called albergid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore perforate at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small way to a nearby location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the needle as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should allow the patient a comfortable recovery in a bed made for him, on his back in a dark house, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place the patient in their natural position so that their nature is corrected, and do not tilt their head to the right or left side too much.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the ointment according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove the patient from that dark room and expose them to fresh air, and make them walk for some causes, and then return the ointment on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this at the time of curations or very close to the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having a cavity that you open through which water may pass more easily by great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, having a cavity that you incise on the seventh day, and corrects that amount which yields the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you close the wound and place your hand over the face of the patient's mouth so that it may heal, let the patient rest in the darkest part for a few days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually let it recover and return to its original state.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in an apprentice's case vision is not excused for some days, and then you should watch over the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have been informed of some who have already recovered from those cases, which are called Artach, and some said to make fire on the Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is discharged.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen such a case in our land where it was performed perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is a new method.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of maagdhaan so that it may be upon those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or brass properly, and their extremities from them to this subtlety triangular, the acute end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	For the healing of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise various hidden flesh masses, from which arises some cause that is associated with the scorpion of heavy burdens, or with a polyp of this kind; and this illness is called polypus, which is in resemblance to that kind of burden represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, dark in color; and from it is that flesh lion-like not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, make the illness disappear between your hands and place it in the sun, and inhale its smell, and prick the thigh in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the parts forward, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you know all the flesh has been separated; if some remains due to any cause for which the sectioning is possible, then quickly use one of the sharp instruments to facilitate its separation for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it festers or an evil abscess occurs, then pause at that which is covered; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then incise and cauterize there where the sectioning must be done and all the cavities should be exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then insert something in the nose after the incision, either a piece of cloth or wool.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is already opened and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is no flesh but only pus, and it will be bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	When you find an obstruction in the vein of which there is any lump, use needles on it and place between each needle the size of a finger or less, and probe the malady and insert one end of the thread into the naris along the ray or for another cause which is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, let it emit its odor into the nostrils' canals until it reaches the brain, and sit over his pillow, for tropic views of this action make children at schools laugh, and it is a light cause for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then return the two ends of the thread, one that itches near the nose and the other that tingles in the nose, and then administer a stitch of flesh around the needles that are in the thread, and do this before you know that the flesh has reached the needles of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the thread, and place a blister near the opening of the vein with a blistering herb, and do this for three days or more until the salve corrodes all that is necrotic from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you desire a cure that is dry, use of that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making purgatives, at which are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for making purgatives flat and open; to which you can insert it at the rear end, with which you will have it when you heat in it oil or what you want from the secretions and causible substances.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgatives are precious: take castor oil, white balsam, cinnamon, saffron, long pepper, rue, and one uncia of ginger. Mix them with wheat juice and calf's gall, make them into pills, and temper one pill with clear water, then give it to the patient through the nose facing forward.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the teeth to the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Pores visible are seen in the teeth at the extremities of the nose, and they become enlarged and palpable within a few days as the swelling becomes apparent upon examination.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should examine that person at the beginning of the appearance of the swelling, and treat them entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And place your hand over the area or the cautery or burning medicine which is at that location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the examination is delayed until after it has become enlarged, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and with little sensation. In this case, do not touch that with a probe as it may be an abscess; for visible pores should only be examined where you have found this abscess due to its great malignity towards the person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and examination is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the poison and incise there without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the缝合鼻子、嘴唇和耳垂，当连续性因创伤或相似原因被破坏时。
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much trust in that operation but rather in skilled individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you need to treat any of these cases, consider whether it is fresh trauma with its own healing, and then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and properly cure it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the disruption are already separated, and any part is made healthy, then you should excise each part from its apparent wound until it has formed a scab.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them. Over these, sprinkle healing dragon's blood powder and apply three layers of diaphonic plaster or another consolidative plaster. Let this paste remain for two to three days, then remove it and change the plaster, leaving it until the wounds heal on their own. Properly cure it until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol.xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	For the extraction of those causes that wind in the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spots observed in the internal parts of their lips lead to abscesses hard and resembling fat, some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Thoroughly incise the lips and all parts of each hardness, then fill the wound with three layers of cloth to keep the wound constricted, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the area with a solution that is astringent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	For the incision of the flesh lodged in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken over the gums, the flesh紧贴的牙龈，古人称之为albulus，然后你必须提起那块肉或将它固定住，使那部分可以分开并拉开，让健康的部分流出或排出。
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place a ligature or another styptic or excitatory powder over the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth with cavities.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the inner and outer teeth and between the gums there are sharp, jagged edges, some of which are blackened and are caused by yellow or green substances that penetrate to the gum causing corruption, leading to blackened teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must make the patient open their mouth with your hand and hold the head in a basin of water, brush the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear so that no cause is broken from them, and do this for the blackness and the yellowing as well as other changes they may have undergone.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what remains of the matter at the beginning of the reasoning is clear, that is good; otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning on those matters the next day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have required mortars for various forms and figures according to how they are prepared in your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, the razors with which the tooth is shaved from the inside part are different from those razors with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you should prepare, which you will often see.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cave that when you cure the tooth of its pain with great skill and take much time in the entire extraction, for no cause can replace the moment when it is extracted, for substance is refined during the process of extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and shows as in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon the pain ceases once the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth where any virtue lies, until it dissolves from the root of the tooth within the gum, then insert those tweezers or fine scissors gradually little by little, so that the fragments are removed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then wash it well to ensure good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your tweezers so that they do not move, and then extract the tooth according to the right method so as not to break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forcibly extracted, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the tooth from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal, as is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or腐蚀的，那么你应当用布包住那个地方，并在末端系上一根细线以防你在操作时将其进一步损坏。
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should incise meticulously in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so as not to break that torn part, and return over the pain because it is worse than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And make sure you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity in the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised. For false impressions often bring great illnesses to men, which are harder to treat than boils, and the causes of their failures, all or some of them, or that you extract from certain bones of the mandible, as false impressions have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of the boil, wash the mouth with warm water or wine mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are fluxes of pus for this reason, as false impressions often cause, then take some saffron and sprinkle it over the wound. If this saffron does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and the fine tongs used to grasp the tooth at the beginning of its emergence is long and thin with some thickness, so that they do not bend when those you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be thus wide enough to prevent them from bending when you make them narrower.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and long. At the ends of these, there should be teeth that interlock with each other and are firmly fixed by a strong construction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of a bird's bill which is called a ciconia, and they are well-made.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the removal of teeth and extraction of broken jaw bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is broken due to some cause, you should first ensure that you pause over the location carefully to allow it to heal for one or two days until the area becomes less swollen; then insert forceps or tongs with teeth resembling the bill of a ciconia or guanta, the shape of which is similar to the forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their pain are felt inside as if by hammer or blow.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or tenacula, then cut over the ridge and strip all the flesh away and insert the instrument which is named attalect, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be briefly an extremity with a small base, and do not bend it so that it is not twisted.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if by this the ridge is pierced, good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular in extremity, in which there is some base:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular and with a finer extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form in the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for rasuring teeth; for youth is made with this instrument which resembles a large spoon, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity twisted or curved, which is some kind of swelling, and not completely engorged so that it is not tense.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsmen find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation signifies and the various ailments; which are the ailments to which the ancients would neither refer nor pause with a specific instrument due to their different forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are tense, or if you need to extract them, then place weight on that area at its location and use what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be some small swelling little by little, and tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely drilled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a small suppuration, first drain that of the pus and its blackness, and cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural shape and size, especially when they grow towards women, particularly venerable old women; therefore, consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to root or extract it by lineament, then extract that one. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, use an instrument with a sharply pointed tip, resembling a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be with the instrument with which you extract that tooth over several days due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominent and worn out, then file that with a file of Indian steel, which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be made of iron from India and the margin smoothed; and it should have small pointed points like a file, on which the tooth is filed little by little over several days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth to cause harm.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And draw that one at the end, and cut that one with a few razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken and the tongue gets in the way, then you should file that area where the sharpness of that fragment is obstructed and smoothed, so that the tongue does not get hurt and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of rotten teeth with an auric or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth are damaged by concussion or removal through impact or extraction, and the patient cannot strengthen over what remains, and you have treated it with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that can be strengthened use an auric foil and not a silver one, because silver turns green and will likely do so in a few days, whereas gold does not change at all.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the honey be in such fineness and graininess according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the honey and put twice its volume between two healthy teeth, and almost as many wrinkles of the honey between two molar teeth, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the thread into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill so that it is not molar.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tightening be such that it strengthens the honey, ensuring that the roots of the teeth are not displaced.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the excess threads with the forceps or scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and cover those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it stay thus tight as a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen her or them in such a manner throughout its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, then they should remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by anything other than good artisans and wise people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fit for some cause of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol.xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue in some cases is natural as one is born with it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, who lies on his back; elevates the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its recession.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer, and incise here to avoid a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision tracts with warm water or with wine or with vinegar; and place the tongue to dry. So that it may not become hardened again at another time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flow of blood occurs, place a vitriolic salve over the area; if the blood flows, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the other treatments once it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, use the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	At times, an abscess forms in the tongue, resembling a small boil, and it is forbidden to perform any operation on the tongue; yet, as it fills the mouth, it becomes more prominent.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth wide and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dark brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in it, then do not touch that area.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turning white, which indicates moisture, then you apply the ointment to it, and incise that with a sharp blade, dividing it into all its parts; and if blood flows during your operation, then place a vitriol compress over it, restricting the flow of blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work as soon as you have treated him completely, as he is washed with oil and salt; and care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are deep in the flesh, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I come upon the deep layer, they are glands which are arranged like cotton, which accidenously occur on the surface and are named the two ears, which when you cure them as we have said in the division and do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will cut away that part or it will rupture by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root is fine, then that should be cut away.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And in the operation for this, you must consider before your operation whether the abscess has already been rested and is completely drained or if it has decreased somewhat; then perform the incision before the sun, with the head of the patient under your care, and hold its mouth open, and a servant holding between his hands the tongue of the patient using the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on that tongue and show it to the patient, and place your hand firmly over that area, then take an oncix and insert it into the abscess, and pull it outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull out from the tunics, and then cut that area with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, although the ends are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which should be made of iron and bent.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not present, then incise that space from which this form issues: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and nearby the incision the abscess will drain with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, drain it with a decoction of rhubarb or of hollyhock leaves, similar in effect to those styptic causes where the flow of blood is restrained, and cure that where it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes sores appear in the cheek or other abscesses besides those of the two ears, and incise those according to what I say and have said in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in the cheek, which abscess tended to have a brown color, with little sensation, which had already closed the cheek of her, and the woman breathed freely, and had already been forbidden to eat and drink water, and she was close to death if more water were to pass just one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already been pressed so much that there were two fingerbreadths between where it would exit through two cuts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut the fistula gently and placed my finger in one of its ends, then pulled it out, and the larger part came with it, and then I incised that part from where another tract originated, and then stretched the opening of the other tract, and grasped its tongue, and then placed my finger in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I incised a large part of it, and there was not much blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the swelling of that woman disappeared, and she began to drink water shortly, and then eat food. Therefore, I continued incising that abscess for a long time without stopping, and an abscess would form in its place, which kept recurring as long as that one was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I shaved and cauterized the swelling of the abscess, according to the method; and then I wandered around and did not know what God had done for that nearby me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol.xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of gout when it is acute.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarr affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure working, and as you often see that the abscess has already subsided and become subtle, then cut where the swelling is aggregated round; if it is of length, and is bloody, with a dark or black color, and is not about an inch, then you should fear the incision of it, for there is fear concerning gout.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut the gout and press the tongue of it with an instrument whose shape defines its form, and place the incision in the new one, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two joints.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And ensure that you do not exceed this limit but only what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you exceed it, you will disturb its proper function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And near the incision, use that which we have described in the incision of two fingers, and ensure that it is healed within.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient was scared by the incision, ensure that you use something to calm him during the cautery, and the way of applying the cautery is simply with sharp water. You should hold the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as described. Additionally, take the water we mentioned in the section on cautery, and apply it moderately but not too thinly to the surface, filling the concavity of the instrument whose shape this describes:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the external part of the cavity in which the medicine is applied be as wide as the bottom of a ray fish, and place the instrument on the medicine over the vagina, and the patient should press her side to allow saliva or mucus from her mouth to enter through the internal medicine, so that it does not leave for any cause on the skin of the patient and adhere there.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube such that the cloth adheres to the tube. Do this as many times as necessary to achieve the desired cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off over three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, reapply it, and after cauterization, clean the circuit of the uvula with a soaked cloth, modify that which is in the circuit of the uvula with the medicine, let it be washed with water, and be externally treated with ointment, and internally with medicines until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is both safe and lasts long without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured by what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take reed, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikatós árabes, camomile, powder of these herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a pot, and be submerged in water, and boil; and the pot let be well covered with good pitch, and in the middle of the pot a stick, over which is placed an instrument concave of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And place the extremity in the mouth of the patient between where the vapor rises to the uvula over the gullet, so that the uvula becomes obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over those spots several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of carbuncles, for it would too strongly affect the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the condition of the carbuncle with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place on its end a hazelwood stopper, so that the opening of the patient's anus is blocked, for the hazelwood stopper prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns adhered in the wound or from a thorn or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious from those, by which you can see it. Afterwards, press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light, so that you may be able to determine what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, carefully make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or rags soaked in milk or a bite of dry bread; or use a piece of sponge well saturated with honey and tightly bound, and let that pass through the throat, for it reaches the location where the thorns are and is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside the meal and secretly extract it; or take a plaster and secretly apply it and secretly insert it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these causes apply to the cases we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a little finger, and at the end of it have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body or that which covers the bone or spine, or that which the doctor places with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, when the patient himself inserts honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and covers it below, and pulls his hand towards the instrument, do all this according to the quantity prepared before it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gouty blood is treated according to what we said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the gout of the patient in the sunlight, after you have understood the language of the disease with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or through fine, subtle means.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, doing this as many times (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the gout) and keep the patient from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a cloth full of water, wring it out, and apply the mouth of the cloth to that area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any of it, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, because the gouty blood will soon come upon contact with the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not already fumigated, then fumigate the patient with cyme or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall into place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of fumigation is this: you take an olla containing burning charcoal and cover the olla with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and plug his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you are sure that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catz, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the patient to drink, eat salty foods and others, and do not let him take water. Thus, it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when seen; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And the instrument is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to a stork's bill, which is curved, and it is filed with lime, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the main discourse on abscesses and their treatment is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special kinds of boils, treated in various ways according to their characteristics, and those of each one described in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are treated in various ways through perforation and treatment of the abscesses themselves, using two methods: one method is for the specific treatment of abscesses; and this involves grasping the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is near the places where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshly location is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its own judgment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And for abscesses, some of which cover areas that should not be perforated but rather allowed to mature until the healing is complete.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And for other abscesses, some of which must be incised when they are ripe and not allowed to mature further as in the case of abscesses near joints. When an abscess is close to a joint, its nature extends into what is within the circuit of that joint, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is fully matured, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore incise the unripe one; and it should not be incised raw, but only those near the anus, so that the preon of it does not spread inward to the parts inside the anus, causing a fistula, or something that occurs in its term before it is healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for perforating the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And note that it is cured when there is an end to the pain and a cessation of fever, and nearly a decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the apex of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And note that you should probe the perforation well and leave it at the apex of the abscess and where pus is coming from the cure.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the probing should be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the upper parts or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use probing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay the probing until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous statement; for if you probe it prematurely, it will prolong the course of the pus and increase the hardness and depth of the lesion.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as the need dictates, or according to that from which the limb derives.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a large puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the string is closed and tied when it is done, so that it stays in place, just as you would do with a tourniquet or in cases of tumors and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mirtle leaf, as in abscesses of anthrax.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, those in which a circular incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More so for those in which none is done thus, as for superficial abscesses, you should puncture them with a superficial puncture or incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to drain all the foul matter at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day push the abscess into another part, and extract a larger portion, and continue doing this in stages until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a green virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy fluid, and thus greatly alleviates the disease, and you should openly relieve it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound from the abscess is small or a flat section. Then administer either hot or cold remedies accordingly; if the abscess is large and the punctures are painful, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have separated a part of the cord or have concaved it in the circuit, then you should close it with cold lint or a thread made of linen, as when you have packed wounds or roots, to maintain their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if a flow of blood occurs during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for many minutes.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure, and use the powders which I have recommended in appropriate places of this our libel and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you must apply powders mixed with wine and oil, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be applied on the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses, by which method the cure of each one is conducted individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and they contain nodes which are formed by their own tissues; the nodes have spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are lumps, and among them are those that contain humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and among them are those that are hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not fear the extraction of those without causing arterial contraction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for the section of these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which you will see nearby, which is called an entremes, until you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is humidity, then divide it with an instrument along its length for a superficial section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line B. between the line G. When the humidity is evacuated, then scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave no cause of all, for if many times returns, if it remains from any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with this you will corrode all that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply to that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cross-like form, make an incision between the two halves of the section and draw out all parts of it, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do as I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly perform for the abscess lanced and in treatment according to what we have said; the lancing of an abscess is lighter, because it involves little bleeding and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are in the head, have no humidity at all; the cause of which is that I cannot describe about an abscess on a elderly woman's head as if it were a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be cut, and if any were struck with it, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses on the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As with abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should lance the auricular regions; but the lancing of all these should be superficial lancing.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the lancing of those in the lower part below so that it helps the body to expel the corruption to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to those things that pertain to the care of that which needs it.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Bluish spots often cause abscesses in the neck, under the chin, and in the armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is found in its own lining; just as with nodules and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are spots. Some are mottled, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not swollen, cut that one with a superficial dry incision from above the part down to the opposite side of the body along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it thoroughly from all parts, extending the edges of the skin around the neck with oil or with small strips if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the incision not be too deep, so that your hand does not touch the vein or nerve during the incision, or to alleviate the patient's pain, and make sure not to incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a glass of treacle or other powders which are fluxes of blood, strengthen the wound, and leave it so that the abscess is at rest and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire again as you have been taught to determine if there are any other small scrofulous swellings. Then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the root of the scrofulous swelling and there is a large vein, avoid incising that scrofulous swelling from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you fold that piece of cloth strongly in half and let it fall so that it may collect.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert the scrofulous lump entirely, then you should adjust the two edges of the wound and sew them up so that no superfluous part remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is a superfluous part due to the size of the scrofulous lump, then you should understand to insert the edge of it, remove that part, and perform suturing as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulous tumors containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears to you as the site of maturation, and stop the perforation below the dry part at the base of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then perform the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it腐蚀的地方防止腐烂。
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound has already been washed, then you apply the cream of flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Section of the ulcer due to an accident in the thigh.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this section in the epilhot, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men with curvature, a cavity should be avoided during the excision of the epilhot, for if not done properly, all the veins and major ones in the thigh may be affected.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have abscesses on the mouth or thigh or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, incise the epilhom with three or four small circles between two circles in quantity, so that the section is across the flesh, not the cartilage, and this place is suitable for a section, which is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are lacking.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the thread of the scalpel, and then cut the thread where it reaches the channel, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the ciplach as we have instructed; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that ignited to what is of its disruption and by the disappearance of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is prolonged in which perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is missing.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you may see some of those abscesses already drained by incision, and the patient has come out of death, with his artery severed, and some have cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound through a single respiration, and thus is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I command to keep the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, when it is time, I command thus the wound, and heal that which remains until it is cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in her throat and incised at one part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat her, and I cut the voice box as it is cut for the dead, and uncovered the wound and stopped the bleeding which was coming from the small wound of the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I have been convinced that there was neither a vein nor an artery cut, and the wind from the wound, and healed her with a remedy.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any accident, nor even hoarseness in her voice, and soon recovered from her ailments.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the case of the heel, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an apostema that occurs on the forehead, and is called a forehead hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema, known as a forehead hernia, is called a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And naturally, it is not something that can be cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other resembles an apostema caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make the patient think this is done with iron only in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And touch that area and investigate the one he points out. If you find a semblance of a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise that area as you would for nodes, extracting what is inside the skin and subcutaneous tissue; otherwise, you must thoroughly examine his entire body, and place care on the area to be cured until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the sections on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the various kinds of nodes, and I have already described all kinds of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And make sure that I recount such that the difference between a node and an exitura does not cause doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an exitura there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the superfluity is sedated; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that leach-lemon which is at or of the sea.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a stain and is made thus, whether greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, express it and inquire about it at its beginning in the tissue which is called intumescent, according to how its form will appear in the capitulum which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand near the extent of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intumescent tissue and consider what is situated in the recess of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as I have taught you, suspend it with a thread, and strip the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack above it, if you can, and extract the healthy part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should tie it several times, and then extract it in pieces so that it does not break for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks for any reason, whether little or too much, the node should return as best as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it breaks any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong powder, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the patient during its healing.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which it contains.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then incise and fill the area with one-third zegi (a type of glass) that is vitriol and let it stay for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to cutting what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the inserted instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large inserted instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium inserted instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small inserted instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, of silver, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument speeds in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Albed and Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	These are of three spices, of which one is great, the other half and little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, half, is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, little, is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is proper that they be for those abscesses, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are in those of the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are sewn. They are made of citron wax, or of lead, or of iron, or of silver. The best are those made of citron wax.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And black feather experiences are made, which they agree should be performed when the fistulas in whose reflections they are located are opened, that those reflections be reflected by their light to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium lead experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the tumors are of three species. Some of them are simple long ones, which have only a single curvature, and they are of three species: long, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have tumors masses, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those having two curvatures, they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them there are three curvatures, and of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a single great curve, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a single moderate curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single slight curve, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a single very great curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a single very moderate curve, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single very slight curve, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a single great curve having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a single moderate curve having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a single slight curve having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a single great curve having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which are incised and scored with nodes and apostumas, and they are of three species, one of which is large, womanish, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the womanish scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which are incised are sharp, while the others are blunt. They are not made in such a manner as to prevent cutting into veins or nerves, but rather to ensure that during the excoriation of nodes, there is no fear of incision into a vein or nerve, and for this reason, the wound heals well and the patient finds some relief from the burning caused by the excoriation of the apostema.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the curved ones, and they are of three species: large, womanish, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of greatague:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of great woman:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of weak woman:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are made of wool and have the appearance of red dye in which alcohol is used.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if there is an external mark punctuated with spurted blood and in that area it flows to the inner and outer parts, when you want, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spurted blood, which are hidden between the fingers, you should perforate the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and they are of three species: great, woman, and weak.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of hemorrhages, where the flow of blood is divided, are of three species: great, woman, and weak; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are made of wool, circular in some length, and very fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these should be these types of suction cups large, medium, and few, so that through those incisions the flow of blood is rapid in necessity, and when you first did not have medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those to stop the bleeding in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the sides of the legs and thighs, and on the sides of the breasts, and on the belly, and on the armpits, and similar fleshly areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some small instruments are made of those tools, resembling scissors according to this form; through which the blood is stopped when done by venesection, or an incision into a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some small instruments are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. xlvi.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to feel cold, and at such times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, as do Roman nipples.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who have this, cut the affected lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then excise all the tumor, and fill the wound with red medicine, then suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if the breast droops towards the sides and is softened due to its size, as happens in women, then cut it into two parts so that each part contains a section similar to the lunar shape. Each section should be contained within the other such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. Then excise the tumor which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and proceed with suturing as well as administering the powders as previously described until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until what corrodes are the remains of the fat. And then cure that which is left until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses where pus flows out.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses where pus flows out are of the species of scrofulous, hard tumors, which contain a lump that is extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised on the lunar phase segment according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of pus is evacuated, then you fill it with cotton and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the cotton remain and be treated with suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the nodes and scrofula is, then you incise thereupon thus as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is extended to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have previously said.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the string is consolidated on it, dark spots often develop into abscesses. And there are signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you press the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And this section on this abscess is dangerous, and especially in those that affect the axillae, the groin, the neck, and other parts of the body; and it is large, so that its cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should be particularly avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is due to the swelling of the opening of the artery, cut in the arterial section along its length; then open the section with clips near the artery, and detach the tunics so that it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other vessel, and reinforce the artery with a double stitch in two places, — which causes you to suture in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then puncture the area between the threads with a needle while it is still bleeding, and dissolve the abscess by allowing it to be fully discharged.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment in which powder is applied while the sutures are being removed; and cure that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then take what you can grasp with your hand from the abscess and cut that area. Then insert the needle where you have grasped with your hand, and make it penetrate; and remove it in a double stitch between the two parts of the thread at its two ends, and tie the abscess with good sutures as I said in the grape stitch from two parts at the ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will slip out, then insert the needle at that spot and keep all the abscess from the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your four threads at four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location where when seated upon it, you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is on it tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Cap off the abscess which occurs due to nerve compression.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is percussion or excessive work on them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most frequent in the areas of the helpers or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are loose.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the major portions of his body. When pressed with force, the patient shows signs of distress.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess located in the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left off, and he is able to move freely without going forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, what affects the joints should not be considered caused by iron, for strong metal can cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But what affects the head or the forehead causes the chain to be fastened with spasm.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then apply heat and cut out the affected area.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a pin, excise the affected area, and stitch it up; and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.lix.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of boil that occurs on the cheek that affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some men have been observed with swellings in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These swellings are called fungals due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is subtle, and the head of that which is affected is large; and the lips of those are convulsed, some being small, and some being greatly swollen.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one case where in the abdomen there were two swellings that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, due to their subtle root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and opened one on the foot that was eighteen inches long, and the other that was six inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the swelling is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you incise it with great spatum (sharpness), and have it cauterized in the fire, for convulsions should be expelled by thoroughly drying them out. If you find the sanc (pus), cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and fearful, guard yourself from inserting a needle; rather when you take lead filings of recent making, strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust closely to the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead gradually in that part, until it is cut and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the part is of great thickness, then in its insertion there is some cause for fear and horror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize that area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure that once the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to insert any part which is of dusky color, with little sensation, or looks suspicious, for such is often cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back in mind to the sick nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the cure of hernia around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia around the navel is caused by various causes; or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the belly, and the lining or intestine protrudes according to where it ends in other ruptures; or by an abscess which flows from a vein or artery as mentioned, or by congestion narrowed within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	More specifically, if it is due to a diaphragm fissure and the lining's swelling, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, often appearing in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have described, with greater diversity in severity. When you press on that area with your fingers, the pain diminishes and soon returns. The area feels hard and you should use warm baths and vigorous work to introduce them.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is apparent and not concealed, neither compressed nor cracked.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if by scorching, when these signs appear the abscess turns blackish in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If by no flesh, when the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is filled according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If by dampness, when you touch it, it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is by scorching from an artery, or a vein, or by dampness; and then you must be forbidden from treating it, for there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to have his own urine, and stand extended. Then carefully examine around the entire navel, and command him to stand with his hands on his hips. Then circumscribe with liquid soap around the area you examined with the tent. Extend the size of the abscess upward by about an inch or two. Finally, apply a strong adhesive or bandage in the manner of binding properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the middle of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; and if you have touched it or handled it with the membrane, then extract it quickly and push the intestine into the internal parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the membrane, then take an oath; and cut away the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, hold the needles and let the area extend and drop by itself; or cut that part when it becomes thin and can fall off, and then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then drain the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture, which you find there, and then treat the wound with ointments until it heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol liiii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of cough.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of kinds of cough and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is advisable in them to treat without causing an ulcer; and we have said about a cough generated by the manner and care of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some kinds of cough are in places where the eradication of it is possible, thus from the chest which is in the breasts or in the thighs and similar members, one should extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and is great, I cannot say that it has proper qualities, for I cannot heal from such an illness nor have I seen another, nor one that is cured by this method.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is as follows: when it is located as we have said, you should first remove the illness and purge of black bile several times, then drain it, if an obvious full collection is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for operation, placing him in a position where the surgery can be performed, and ensure that you secure his limbs so they reach the area; and properly curve all sides of the couch to allow a thorough excision without damaging any vital parts of his body.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not stop it too quickly, and press the areas, and wipe away the gross blood with your hand or an instrument at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter a large flow of blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as the cure for them using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the specialty of lithiasis alone, and it is not approximated to the specialty of tympanists nor to the specialty of hypochondriacs, for this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this specialty of tympanist hypochondriac with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility in the limbs or another illness like hypochondria, as if it is in their lungs or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not medicate them with iron, for there is fear of this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient in good health with no other illness than hypochondria only, and neither young nor old, then the manner of the operation for them is that you elevate the limb between your hands, and apply pressure to the abdomen with your hand, pushing the water out through the opening of the urethra, and then take a thorn spasm according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp end like a thorn; but it should have some small thickness to prevent you from entering the intestine during the operation and damaging it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for when you touch the section it is away from the navel by the quantity of three digits to the lateral parts left of it on its upper part.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your section is left of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section is on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And you must not place your section on the side where the pain is felt, for then the superfluities will flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the entire length of the canal with your instrument, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand above the spout between the canal and the sponge, and you draw off that fluid; if it is the quantity of an egg or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the sponge so that the fluid reaches the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a thin silver catheter. It is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised in the manner of a feather, as you can see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it often lets some of the water pass through the hole in a small quantity; for if you evacuate more than can fit in the hourglass, the patient may quickly die from resolution of his animal spirit, or it might bring about his death within five days.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to how you interpret the signs of the patient's condition from his pulse and the quality of his urine.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the fluid which causes it, for it is often retained by the string that holds it above the cyst where you have perforated it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeatedly apply the instrument to the patient if they tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to immerse them in water but only slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and allow a great quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sandy soil, and sprinkling with wet sponges in bath, and under the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mesentery and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the treatment of children whose urine outlets are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born with the belly of their mother closed, and the opening of their mixture is not perforated (or is strictly closed or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then cover the opening in the flank as soon as it appears with a thin moist sponge according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a thin lead peg in the wound and tie it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate let him do so; then return it up.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not let this close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one from which you have withdrawn should be treated with a lead peg, as we have said, for several days before it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which you have withdrawn it not from its place, are said to be caused by stones. The stone that is native and the wound should be placed at the end of the tail of the penis so that urine cannot pass through the inside parts; while raising the penis with your hand above the outside parts; and this is not a generation, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to its right course, and it is an illness that remains.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient is placed face down, and then extend the head of the penis towards your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of perpucium with a sharp blade, thus as if it were an incision of a feather, or any part you do not cut at all, so that the middle of him comes seeming like the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle location according to what is convenient.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation on the flux of urine, if you notice any motes accidently arise; and pause for him at that which you are about to incise, and cure the wound within until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white substance that occurs in the prepuce, at the head of the penis, with corruption and blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motes visible occur in this white substance on the penis and form a raised fleshly prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, take a thin cord and cut through that in which that whole mass is contained; then place your hand over it to immerse it in Egyptian ointment; then apply fine-willow-leaf ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised individual, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part outside, then you should remove the abscess that is inside at the beginning before it becomes consolidated; then cure the part outside. For when you cure this part along with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And examine the conditions in the groins and in the foreskin for blackening and corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkened and which is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，使用蜂蜜，它由陈紫罗兰粉、经过筛过的琥珀屑和穿孔的珍珠粉混合而成。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then attend to that while the other treatment heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it has broken out.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the ulcer is corroded and is completely destroyed within an hour, then you must insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease excretes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce (with this adhesion not occurring in those from whom the prepuce is absent, and upon which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to the plague or an abscess), you must excoriate with a blunt instrument while the glue is dissolved and the head of the ulcer is released from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you must excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the ulcer and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin and light, it is perforated slightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis a piece of the thin skin, which is already softened by the hot cautery so that it does not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be cauterized with a cautery when it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity in the same way as other wounds: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that the best operation and the lightest possible way, losing ourselves in health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision in any of their free men, for they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of artisans and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with cautery; and they use ointment with honey and incision with ungual matter.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or gum Arabica instead of wax, which in modification like this, the wax escapes from above, for the string of the foreskin is in two tunics, and I loosen the outer tunic and strengthen the light one, so as to avoid another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the circumcision performed by clippers, it is digital, which shoemakers use, but the incision at the end of the male member is not secured, for it strongly enters into the tissue.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with wax, you must use iron and corrupt your own operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the string of the child is short by nature, and in such a manner that it does not need circumcision, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But concerning the circumcision done with scissors and gum Arabica, its quality is good, as I have experienced. For the scissors cause a proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is as sharp as the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand proportionally on two points of sharpness, and cut according to one comparison in one time; and it is made a compression of gum Arabica in a figure containing the string of the foreskin from all sides, by which no error can be committed.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie mostly if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do so except that you tie the faeces in its anus only, and let it out the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then comfort it in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place it among your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the anus and blow into the rectum, and pull that out so that it expands the head of the anus, and then modify that which is added to it by deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the area marked with faeces in a double knot, and then tie a little below that a small second ligature, and then place your finger on the location of the ligature and keep it there with good tension, and incise between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the leg slightly and extract the head of the vein; and let the bleeding proceed slowly, for that is better; place powder above and over the powder put a cloth in which is soaked hawthorn in vinegar mixed with fresh rubbed olive oil; leave that there until the next day; cure that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the fingers are not trimmed at the tips and the others are trimmed, let the stem of the key form the handle, and let the length of the two cutting edges be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, the error in modification is that if you accidentally remove the intrinsic ligament entirely or partially, you must redo the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, ensure that you extend that one in your hand before the incision site and make the incision with equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it in your hand, then extend it with an uncus and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if more than three days have passed, and it remains swollen with an abscess, then you let the abscess be incised with a cautery, and excise that for ease of treatment, and section it according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the abscess, for if not done properly, it might lead to complications.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that part where the wound consolidates with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not cause harm.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a hot infection, or by pus or flesh, and resembles those we have mentioned in our section on the methods of treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being caused by a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then know that the patient has an inflammation of the urethra.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his own buttocks and extend his back abdomen above his own back, and the patient bend his legs as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, so that the urine is relieved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly make the cause known to the patient, and know that you should administer extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be thin and hollow, like a quill in subtlety as long as half a palm, at the end of which should be a thin canula.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination extraction through this is that you take the syringe folded and tie it at the end with good thread or fine twine; then insert the ends of the syringe into the part left by the incision, and cut any excess from the thread with scissors if needed. Then firmly push the syringe in with vigor, and quickly withdraw the syringe with your hand and the thumb.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cut in the patient's side, and pour urine from his bladder and groin with mixed oils, olive oil, and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the probe to facilitate its passage to the urethra; and then fold the foreskin upwards at the point of incision; and then push the probe inside to reach the bladder; and then push it further until it reaches the cause below, ensuring it is correctly positioned. If this order is not followed, the meat in which it is placed will become tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then gradually insert the thread into the wool, for urine will harden the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and use urine for treatment, and apply the probe continuously until the bladder and patient are adequately relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol.lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder cleansing, use clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burning sore there, or it is constricted by edema, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that at the extremity of it is closed, so it is clausa.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thuswise.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which that which is pushed enters, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is pulled by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, then it is drawn again, and when it is expelled long, according to how it acts on the clampcedra, in which naphta is placed in the battlefields of mar.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, when you want to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw from it what is pushed to the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the distal end of the cedar stick into the vagina as we instructed in the surgery; and then push the moisture away as you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the illness will center there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the thread inside the lint.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder and place the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder. Then tie it tightly with a double thread of silk, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the distal end of the catheter into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand over the bladder as the moisture is drawn down, ensuring that the illness centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; perforate that circle completely round; then insert strong thread through all those holes as they are turned around; then return the circle as it is fastened alsofatur, placing your hand in the part where you wish to locate the humidity, and smell and wash it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you have done with the bladder, and place your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol.lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of gravel.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of gravel and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel generated in the kidneys and gravel generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the gravel for which major surgery is performed, and excision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am now narrating that amendment, manifestation, and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most often affects children; and the signs of it are that urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its thigh, motes appear greenish, and soon becomes dressed; and for this the buttocks are shaved instead of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the recovery of children within which they have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in the young, it occurs through that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which is greater in the stone and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, begin with the treatment that modifies gout by using a cristerry which excretes through all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone and leads to its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient's feet and ensure they are stretched out straight so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it touches the locus or a few inches from it.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place those you have prepared under your hands, while the others remain with the patient, so that the bladder is made to hang down toward the parts left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply that and the whole region.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the sole in the space, then immediately apply heat to it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel the sole with your touch, then ensure that you anoint it with oil from your little finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or from your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert this into its anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And apply heat to the sole while you touch it with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the outer parts. Look for the place from which it came.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand retract the penis which is below, at the location where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a speculum; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, ahead of the left thigh; and let the incision be on that bone which you said is at the anus, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision outward is wide and inward narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone is possible, and not larger, for we can barely contain the incision which is at the anus. The bone should have the incision, and it is fashioned as a hole with a certain capability.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And be aware that there is sometimes an angle or edge in the stone, which makes extraction difficult for this reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which resembles a lion's gallbladder, and is round, and through it a light extraction is made.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if there is one that has angles and edges, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus removed, then you must probe it carefully, or strengthen it properly with a gesture decently performed. The end of which should be like a file on which you strengthen the stone, and do not evade from it; or insert a thin instrument under its curved end into it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then enlarge it a little, and if you wish to have a flow of blood, incise it strongly with vitriolic acid.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then push a little in that place; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance on your part to cut such a large section, for you will either cause the patient to die or lead them to continuous difficulty in urination, which is why the area is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is inside so that it may be expelled, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract it from the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over the soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in infused oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lift the patient's head on their pillow, and do not remove the bandage on the seventh day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, moisten the area with water and some oil, and then apply that part with diafinicon ointment and balsam ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hard and corrosive, and appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and through it urine flow is prohibited (this is known as the discharge of blood through urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with warm water and salt, and oppose all spices, using what you find suitable for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And note the hours throughout the entire cure that you have done between the thighs and applied the medicines which are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited, then cure it by doing what I have recommended before reaching the section; for too many operations for this treatment are accused of causing dryness; and now I will explain this, that you take a metal auger, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the fist.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and tie it around the vein, letting the pear rest so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the vein, piercing with ease where the puncturer will go to that pear.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And you rotate the puncturer with your hand in that pear little by little, and you complete the puncture where you have made the one on the other part; for the urine is quickly released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is damaged from the pear of the part beyond the vein, for that is cracked, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not possible due to some cause that prevents it, then tie honey around the pear, and another piece of honey above the pear.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind over the pear on that vein between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it there.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the string and modify the abscess, which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And you do not need to use thread of silk for the kidney, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other thread above this, for when the bile is removed near the disease of the kidney, the stone returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this, you must raise the stone to the parts above when you remove the bile, or it will return and take its place, and the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol. lxix.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is less commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that a woman who is very light is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is well educated who will tell the doctor whether she is a virgin, or has been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who is well versed in this art, especially the operation more so.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section above the pubis in women is far from the location of the pubis, so you need a prolonged section, and there is fear in that area.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to do this, then ensure that you use an old woman who is well educated, and one is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are lacking in that, then seek an old and subtle woman, or present an experienced matron well versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who is part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have that woman present, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about the pubis to the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, so she must put her finger in the woman's anus and feel for the pubis.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to rest over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May be if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing his left hand on the bladder, and ensure that she maintains a good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually moisten that area from the opening of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the depth of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then command him to insert the application of strength into the wound. Place the depth of the thigh in any part where he is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not damaged by the stone, cut it out.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the grains of pepper are spots: some are small and large, lion and pungent, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And you know what grains of pepper are so that you may signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol trioxide to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare the instruments you mentioned for the extraction of pepper in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area, strengthen it with powders, and strictly do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strong pain will ensue.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the heat of the blood has passed after several days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation when the swelling has subsided.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquaosa is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white chyle, which is left by the chain of the genital juices containing the humor, and is named chyle.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the own chylific tissue, which nature prepares in the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and this is the chain of the genital juice among the white chyle, which we have said, and it is not this but tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity, having streaks of color, may be yellowish or bloody or red, or black and floury, or white watery, and this is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this addition of water is located are these: if it is in the white cell (bladder) as we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like a fig, and shows the root, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper parenchyma, then the abscess is round, departing from the fig, and for this reason one estimates that it is another fig.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the root and the white cell (bladder), then cut open the bladder.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the moisture, you should draw out the color of the moisture in the abscess through an incision where the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the treatment of it, you should command the patient to have a bloodletting if this is within your capability, and press his body well.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he is laid supine on his back on some cause a little rug or cloth, and places the head on the pillow.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to stand on his right side, who extends his spear from one side to the other, reaching from the iliac crest to the ribcage.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the iliac crest at the midpoint along its length, close to the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to right proportion, equally distant from the line where you shall split the skin of the iliac area, until it reaches the white muscle beneath.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this: you must not invade that; your excision from which you are excising should be suspended over the highest and most subtle part, and carefully examine the excision according to the quantity within your reach.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the muscle full of fluid with a wide hole, and extract all the fluid.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labias of the section with pins, and extend the cut upwards; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the cut in that manner which is possible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in parts, especially its fine underside; for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mais if the humour proceeds from within his genitalia during your operation, when you have completed the incision of the cut, return inside that, and carefully suture the two labias of the genitalia, and carefully treat that as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humour corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the humour, and carefully treat that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is aggregated in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part as you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to you to be a simple operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and interpose in the sections wool soaked in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over it which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and extend that over two genii et miraculum ventri; and place above cloths folded and powders, and lay those above bran according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fill them with finely shredded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers, one end grasping the buttocks inside the other, and the second end grasping the back of the thigh, and two ends leave over the thighs, and two other ends over the hips, and all the structure be fitted into the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the section instead of iron; and you grasp a fine surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white chaf is uncovered containing the water, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then lance the blister with needles, and incise it with needles, and cauterize it with a fine, ignited cautery; and cut away that portion as much as is possible in order to eradicate it entirely; and guard against the smoke so that the fire does not reach it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from the danger of infection, and better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter a contrary condition and need to apply a cautery during the incision time or during the cautery time, or in case of infection, then treat that contrary condition as you would any other, applying the appropriate cure as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I advise; and when you are certified by what we have said about the signs, that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you need to cut the abscess on some elevated part, then puncture the boil at the lower part of it with a lancet, and place the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the view be wide enough to contain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place yourself properly over the area, touch that part and leave the other, so that the water may flow smoothly.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And place it properly so that the wound may be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you puncture it: this is not done except because the white linen in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prohibits the efflux of water. Then you must place in the wound a pledget or instrument from which water is extracted from the dropsy, the form of which is precedented; or apply a small sponge to the swelling of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is gradually expelled over about six months or until it is fully discharged; and when it is gathered, then puncture it according to that method, so that the abscess may pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is a danger of losing important bodily functions; for I have seen cases where the release of the hernia led to saving the patient's life.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in that case and the types of abscesses involved.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the tissues where the glands are located, and this happens for various causes: either due to acute excessive heat, which is infused into the glands, or due to a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain does not affect it; it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess is firm and blackened, of which the color is dark, and there is no tremor in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes abscesses form due to the congelation of the arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as you can recall, or due to inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than this, that which is due to the inflammation of arteries is known as the dispersion of the abscess when one comes upon it at those places said; and not to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than this, that which is caused by the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause; you must apply compression to those places.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that section be made on this species and on other tissues; for you incise the cord of the testicles, then place the probe above the parts above, and extract that from the white chord, and deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you deliver that from all parts of the abdominal parts.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the abdomen is already consolidated with those tissues, you must extract the probe and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the abdomen, or between what is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the natural flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, then delve into everything that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is external.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an apostema enveloped by some envelope similar to a blister, and it makes physical exercise, movement, and walking on the affected side difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is a fear of what precedes it, which is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, proceed with the operation according to how we have described the first steps.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should suspend the affected side on an elevated cushion; then attach the scrotal suspensory to the parts below; and place the inguinal ligament on your thumbs, which are tested against the thigh; and have another minister assist you, extending those with a strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp blade transversely through the middle of the vessels among which the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you cut, and tie the other end at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle place with a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that it causes the vessels which do not nourish one of two essences, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you cut all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they wither due to the cutting of the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and that they become established, or that they wither by themselves and do not have vigor.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that extends from the ciphac (pubis) over the abdomen, through the muscles of the abdomen. Because of this rupture in the intestines, some of the intestines protrude.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either from the pubis or from the inguinal region. These two species occur due to various causes: from a blow, from jumping, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension from the pubis, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that develops within the tissue, causing the pubis to compress the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to a rupture from the pubis; at the beginning, it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears differently from the visible wound nearby. This is due to the pressure on the intestine, and the body's reaction in the regions surrounding the pubis.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it is stopped up, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it becomes painful, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is feared that the examination should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with his hand at the internal parts of his cavity if he obeys in his return, and then tie it over his collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which supports the cord of the testicles upwards, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then place two fingers at the cut section according to where you need to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to be perforated from there, let it be.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that swelling which they leave of the cord of the testicles, while the white hard swelling of each part is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert the tip of your knife into what is seceded from the testicle, in between the white swelling, which is left of the cord of the stone, and between the swelling behind, and release any adhesion that is in the rear part of the stone.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place your hand on the parts in front of the testicles, and with this extend the white swelling with your left hand, and elevate the stone between the swelling and the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the stone upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And near the tips said that there is no cause for the intestine enveloped in the white hard swelling.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause in him, then you remove that to the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle made of strong steel, which is double the thickness of a single wire, and insert it into the root of the scrotum, which is below the testicles, at that section; and then incise the extremities from which fluids emerge, ensuring there are four wires, and place some of them on a certain figure in the manner of a cross; tie this to the scrotum about which we said was below the testicles with strong thread in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the wires and tie them tightly with strong thread so that none of the vessels nourishing them can transmit any cause, thereby preventing an abscess from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another tie somewhat looser than the first, about three fingers' breadth away; then, at these two ties, leave from the scrotum, which is below the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger, and incise the rest in a circular manner, and protect it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles by section of which flows pus and healing as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications the white cloth is cauterized, which we have mentioned near the incision of the fear of pus flow, for several days this occurs). Leave the plaster until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing is delayed, then apply warm water and place it on that area until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol. lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done this way as we have described in the hernia case; which is to tie the vessels near the section at that facilitation of his; and dry out in the middle place around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you must treat the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the geniuses do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the genius; and if they do attribute one, it is rare; and return them to their normal position in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged at this, there is an adjusted fissure in the chiasm where descend the intestine into the chiasm; and this happens due to the extension of the chiasm, which is in the ankles as we have said, the cause being that the chiasm is extended, and nearby it becomes softened and the area becomes an apostema and exudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is with a cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and the patient lies on his side between your hands, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses dries out by exsanguination according to the width as much as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cloth that is under as it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the wick and place it over the prominent area of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then stitch the two prominent areas over the ends of the wick of the cloth, and adjust them with the stitches one to another.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go through the entire cloth, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause as I have faith in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the flanks, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more closely related to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the scrotal skin becomes discolored in some men, it is softened because the flesh between there is softened, and care must be taken of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who cares for the treatment to let the patient lie according to their condition, and entirely over the part that is softened above the natural scrotal skin; and then he should bring together the two edges at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, sew in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotal skin with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards care for the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol lxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for cause it is permitted to me to remember it in this treatise; and the remembering of it is necessary for two reasons, of which one is that when asked about it as a physician, one knows the treatment for those who suffer from it; and the other reason is that we may have occasion to castrate other beasts for our young ones, such as boars, goats, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore say that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by making a cut with forceps.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is to kill the beast in cold water so that its genitals are softened and limp while hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those organs in your hand so that they are relaxed and do not show marks upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In case of castration caused by fissure and secution, make sure you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then suspend the ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those wounds that you have made with each incision.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any on the flap for any cause, but use the fine thread which is on the needles.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles because the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: one where a female characteristic appears between the testicle cord, specifically between two testicles, with features resembling those of a woman.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that channel in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the channel of the woman around the pentelnil (vagina) is such that it has two parts somewhat like the testicles of a man, slightly different in that they extend outward like the scrotum of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you must incise those tight muscles where the pain is felt, and then properly treat those areas with the treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the channel of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is performed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Labia majora are usually adjusted over natural causes where it is stretched and is seen in appearance; sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and distends during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the excess mucus in your hand or a vessel and discard it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not leave it in a vessel, especially in the presence of the patient, to prevent a flow of sweat.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother until it fills that space; and a large cyst is situated outside the parts according to the likeness of a string (and for this some first called it "caudata malitia"); therefore, we should cut it as we cut mucus, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On the care of alopecia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alopecia is when the hair of the woman is not perforated, or is lost in small amounts.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental pain is due to an illness that has preceded, and that is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a subtle or thick chafe.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is felt in the knee, or in the sides of the leg, or in the upper part of the leg, or in the lower part of the leg, and you prohibit coughing and intercourse and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, carefully; more so if it is not obvious, then you seek that area with your fingers or by touch.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More so if the obstruction is due to a subtle chafe, and is close to the two lips, then you probe and dislodge that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powder on the two lips, and then place your fingers, indicating with both hands around the area.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that subtle chafe is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place it over the area, and keep a man there to prevent the incised location from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the abscess is large and thick, then incise it with a spatula or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the ulcer is superficial, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and enemas, mixed with alum.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from becoming slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it there for several days and administer cooled water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then use the other consolidation treatment before it heals.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you should incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to an abscessed boil, for the abscessed boil that is in the greater part do not make any counter-irritation by applying a metal in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter seventy-three.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins between which there is a constant flow of pus; and as for old hemorrhoids, they are formed by ulcers.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and ulcers when in the region of the greater pelvis and do not appear to the sense, then for those do not make any cure.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the greater pelvis on which there is sensation, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And ensure that you insert the female into many hot folds and then spread the scissors or a coarse cloth over them, and incise those areas with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those wounds the flux of the juice from one of the incisive powders with seven bites, thus and seeming to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the soles of their feet for an hour, and then rinse that with cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make that incision in a decoction of sumac and of scurf peas and of walnuts and of resembling herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of wheat and apply it with honey and wine, making a plaster with this over their back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it with two vinegar compresses, and to the breasts make seven incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of cumin or in the juice of pennyroyal or in the juice of hyssop with seasoned wine, and apply it to the area; and then dress the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I first speak of that which has a harsh appearance, cover that you insert here according to what appears to you as I said in the same manner.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within and make it healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol.lix.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye in the center.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special cases of abscesses occurring in the center, such as carbuncle, abscess, ulcer, adenitis, erythromela, fistula hemorrhoids, and lymphadenitis, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of those, as well as the signs of those, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And let it be known that I will discuss in this treatise on abscesses how to treat those that occur in the center when they are among the abscesses that heal, and if you want to know how the operation is performed for it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain in the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it catches over that the sensation, when noting corners of it, then treat it with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should place the woman on a couch with two couches; recline her on her sides and adjust her feet at the lower part of the abdomen, and spread her thighs, and position her arms below her hips, and have cushions of lint applied as necessary.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the rectum straight and administer the instrument through the major orifice, the shape of which will be described in the cases that will be given below.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the edge of the major orifice of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the major orifice should not be more than the edge of the orifice, and thereby treat the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the artery, then cover it with powder on the wall of the artery's opening so that the instrument cannot enter the artery's opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover the vein that runs in the artery with a cloth, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vein within until the openings of the artery are open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that part by cooling the head of the patient with spiced wine.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the phlegm is evacuated, then cover the wound with a sponge submerged in olive oil or green olive oil in which there is some astringency; and place the wick in the opening of the artery.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the artery and over the ankle a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows are boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is usually cured in about two days by applying an ointment that you mix with what is appropriate until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed and tried with chrismated water and honey, then with water in which is boiled lily or of arum long tongue, and then returned to ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep within the liver, then beware that you are forbidden from treating it with iron, taking care to do as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol.lix.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to properly treat miscarriages according to an unnatural occurrence.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning of the labor the signs of a natural delivery. And when you see the female begin to push at the opening and desire to smell the air, and this is made wet by what comes from her, and the expulsion is quick, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion is over her head, and the second one is either above or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, immediately compress his abdomen so that the embryo descends gently; when it is on its head, turn it to the second position, and this is cleaned of those superfluities with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the child is situated in front of the head of the child and its feet, or one of its hands, or on its side, or its head, and strongly it is converted over its neck, resembling the figures that are not praiseworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of these, and which engine is in them so that it may be signified by this and be placed upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is situated on its head by natural means, and it is vehement for the woman and made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already weakened, then apply that sezer, or what women have for it, and evaporate the congealed menses with fenugreek and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the needle between his so-called narrow spaces a little and open the second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which flows what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then the woman should be rubbed with a mixture of mustard and fenugreek.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her to inhale the mixture, holding it in her nostrils and mouth for about an hour, until the fetus is expelled quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce the dosage to facilitate further expulsion.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet off it, and shake the cushion over the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside and the wound is fatal, then incise there and extract the entrail or lay the body on your lap with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be forth-guessed.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo above its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the body yeys over its feet, then make sure you push those parts inwards, and gradually reduce the body size, equalizing that, and taking one foot and extending those parts gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it is situated between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that turn outward in a proper condition, for that will be forth-guessed if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forth-guessed as we have recommended, then you return the body gradually back into place according to its natural figure, for that will be lightly forth-guessed.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take fine alum and dissolved gum, grind them together in the mortar for good pounding, and apply this to the back of the woman, just below the waist.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then perform that cauterization in clear water, while he manages to locate the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of his soul are softened, then apply a fumigation with myrtle and place it over him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then perform the cauterization over a charcoal, and then make him sneeze by touching his mouth, and remove it, and apply a gentle compression to the lower part of his abdomen, which will soon cause him to urinate.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Apply pressure to his genitals and his testicles.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the urine flows as described, then gently insert his testicles little by little; and the woman should be lying on her side with her head down, her feet elevated, and her knees pressing against the bed, while holding his genitals.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then apply gentle pressure to his abdomen little by little, and when his feet are placed in the auricles, extract what has been left between the lower parts.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not freed, then take the feet and move them with vigorous movement, and place what is on top of the hypochondria gradually little by little as the wound opens to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and enlarge the wound little by little, and command the woman to express it as the wound opens.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and attempt to remove it.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be removed, then apply pressure to the site, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has come, then apply pressure to the abdomen, and then study the reduction of the hand, and enlarge the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to breathe deeply as she expels it.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the leg and spread its hands while the foot's skin is held by the mother's side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the foot and then gently rotate that part little by little, so that it becomes easier to handle.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and settled, then place something over the wound that we have advised to use of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be cooled little by little. When you have done this, place the sponge on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be wrung out thoroughly; and make it moisten the area with the mixture.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus's exit is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother experiences horrid symptoms in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the skin there, so that it is not retained and causes harm.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you push the child inside between the parts inward where you have placed the other, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and let it out-gently moved slightly, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of two infants or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin spots appear several times, and sometimes three or four appear, but this is strange and hard to determine; more often they are caused by natural factors, not from within.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they be multiple, a second one, and are separated by clefts, distinguishing them within the ligament at the umbilicus of each. Sometimes they appear singly as if a fetus were gently moved by natural compression, and some times they appear indistinctly as if they were unmovable, as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to distinguish, you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then treat them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and performs this with subtlety and delay, and is ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes embryos are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you must verify that a woman who aborts has produced one, another with two altogether formed, which cause is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who knows well that part seeming to her with so much confidence.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol.lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus where we have spoken in the division of medicine and it is not yet outside, then you must resort to surgery more. You must consider whether the woman is in good health and not among those accidents for which her danger is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is laid on her back with her head inclined sideways and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tie it to the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the patient with olive oil and mucus from almond and fenugreek and honey.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should apply her hand with those oils and mucus, and place her hand with facilitation in the patient, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to be born through its head, and then place your fingers in the folds of its neck, or on its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave the beard area, or on the furrow of its throat, or on the proper locations of its ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the thumb with your right hand, curve it at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause below.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And grip it completely, so that the tension of the thumb is alleviated as is done in drawing out a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And hold it there so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then have the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them where the part is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the bowels is forgotten, let the fingers be plunged into the place which seems full; and do so until all the bowels are forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is inserted before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that part due to its constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it until all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the insertion of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do so also with the other hand and in both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the bowels is large, or it undergoes constriction during insertion, or there is adjusted water in its head, then you must insert spiny sponge between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or that you puncture it with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come in the forms of other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do so if the bowels have a large head by nature: then you must incise that with a ringed knife, or puncture it with an alundat as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should open the furcula, then split where the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor resists incision, then you cut the head as soon as possible according to what will be possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the part below the abdomen is suppurated or is in hydrops, then make a puncture where the humidity that is in it flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the wound is on his feet, then the traction of it is light and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and foot, then make a puncture where you will draw out with a piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and foot to allow what is within them to flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs are swollen and return to normal, then the midwife should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then insert her hand into the prepuce of the vein, and search for the head, and throw it into the fingers into the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two needles, and throw them there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the main artery is constricted by an abscess, cut which occurs to him; ensure that it is not tightly bandaged; rather, first administer effusion of fatty humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the side of the body, whenever possible, lance it: and administer what we have said about the live wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the cavity.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for abscesses caused by which occur from the main artery.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is now the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess in his swelling; and inflammation develops inside what was open, and begins to spread.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed my hand on it using some causes with strong attraction, and drew out one bone, and after several days, drew out another bone; and I was too marvelled, for in the womb there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, the woman existing in her swollen condition, and had seen such a manner for a long time, corrected it with a small incision.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not object to this being strange, since in this there is science and aid for what the physician administers through his hand for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form for vertigo at which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you ligature the veins, at which ligature two vertigos are placed at the two extremities of two threads.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, let this vertigo cover be more delicate in texture, and made of either hemp or thread from flax.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each thread be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle location of two threads are two ligatures of that same thread which are already secured, of which the length is about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional things should be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they are open when you reverse the two prescribed vigiles.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another shape similar to that one, fine and very light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it from silk thread or fine linen thread according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of these additional pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the uterus until the metron (forceps) does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the vigil which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is used to push the stone:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of supporting in which the large head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fish teeth, upon which it is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of supporting light:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which has closing teeth upon which the head of the stone is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities upon which the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied, the artisan should prepare them, making their operation as light as possible and providing enough for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you should induce labor. Then, command the patient to hold her breath, and immediately apply a cold cloth to her, strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this she delivers, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a hole and place it over the herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, scizacanthus arabicus, and cassia lignea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and hold it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that hawking as we have said before, and the second one should be done with greater speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this method of treatment does not succeed, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or almond extract, and then insert it into the wound and seek out the second one, as you have found. If it is attached in the palm of the hand, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the hand does not fall due to the pull.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Place the hand on both sides of the back easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction so that it obeys and avoids adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the hand is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment with hawking and medicating the throat with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If, however, you do not exhaust all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue it in an iteration of abstraction, but rather cover what is thus issued from it to the mouth of the large intestine in the female groin, and apply a plaster and tetrafarmakon; for that will cause it to pass away within about a few days and be dissolved and exhausted.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it passes, raise the bad humor to the head, and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; and then you should have ready sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies for it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients recommended sub-fumigations with nutmeg and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menses and the afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the subtle end inside the cone and the wide end over the fire, and position the sub-fumigation above the flames.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that place where the subfumigation should be consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated child's anal condition.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the child cries and the anal area is not perforated, treat them with a subtle ointment.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her said ointment; otherwise, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and ensure that she does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place it over the area soaked in wine and oil; next, apply the ointment until it is absorbed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it has formed a scab, then place a catheter for several days to keep the area moist, and wait until the child wants to heal.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if a scab forms on the buttock due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and next treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that leave openings.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that leave openings on the outer part are often large and swollen, those close to the anus or in the region of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or a carbuncle.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and flows with watery white or thin suppuration, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what they are caused by their outflow and by wind; sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in outflow, and a strong discharge is characteristic of those caused by worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to distinguish between a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula, you should insert your finger into the anus. If there is no pus, then the fistula does not penetrate.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is hardness, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair between which you feel the probe or hair in your hand.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all, nor any cause of obstruction due to feces or worms or hardness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now apply to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then the sign of this is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the course of the region; and that pus continually flows from it; and that it does not respond to any medical treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the cure of these requires the hard work and skill of the surgeon over which they preside.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, heal them with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already healed and progressing.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back with his legs elevated between his thighs, the buttocks inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and approximately insert a lead or eram tube if it is in the tortuous fistula, where you can feel the location through which the tenta passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert the needle there in the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the needle itself that the tenta is already by itself discovered and penetrates, or if you feel something between the needle and the siphac or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing is not there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it is healed in some men after an attack.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which hope is placed for relief, you shall use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula as described before, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it approaches the center; then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you know that all those tissues around the fistula have been sufficiently cauterized and are tightly sealed, resembling goose quill feathers.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And carefully cure that which is with cold humors wrapped around it until all those tissues that are cauterized are healed, and then cure that which needs medicines to generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is cured, well; and if not, then it will not be cured in some time through another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tent passes inside but does not penetrate further, you have said that which is in the anus, and between that and the tent which is often of flesh or leather, sear the fistula in what dries the surface of the cleft. Then dry the cleft from the beginning of the fistula, and you should sear the tent, and it should be in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent passes through, and through the tent it is released and cauterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated tissues which are similar to a penile canal and do not damage any of these by this cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there is a flow of blood greater than usual between you and your operation when inside those tissues, then as much as it takes and for the lighter of these pus-exuding instruments, cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine. For the cautery with fire makes two good adjustments: it adjusts those tissues tightly and causes the abscess by the elimination of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with salt wrapped in cloth or in a triangular bandage around the area that gets swollen, and then cure the wound with a hard flesh ointment that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in these medicines which have stiffness and excision; when restoration occurs, it is cured, and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if the tent is set up and between you and her it is of cloth or flesh, and close to the penetration, then this is not an operation in itself but rather according to a way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by seeping it such that you achieve the cavity of it so that it may be possible for you to insert something and the cure, being close to penetration; and do not proceed with complete sectioning so that you do not penetrate the sac containing the cord, and thereby cause damage against the patient's will; and then cure it as we have said since the wound will certainly heal; or by lengthening that veil and cleaning that pus which seeps therefrom near the anus, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the section between what you can percutaneously; and then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound through sectioning, and if the opening above is not consolidated and ruptures the open fistula in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cavity around the surface of the body near the anus and at the edge of the buttocks, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and introduce it into that channel wrapped in several threads or around them; then introduce the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus more inward, then you extract the thread from that, taking it out as you introduced your hand into the anus; then extract the end of the thread and adjust the two ends to tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the tissue can be cut away, tightly sew those areas where the tissues are cut between the two ends of the thread.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for it is not your task to do this so as not to injure the skin; and then apply something to promote its healing.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine of the needle used where the fistula is divided: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, thus you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain in the insertion area of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be described in two ways: one where they resemble charcoal, or those that are like the fat of an olive.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, they can be small and large, with the pain coming from them at times and being constant, with marks, and outside the anus, in the extremities thereof.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that affect the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a bit of constant bloody discharge comes, and are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the womb is to command the patient to lie down and to be pressed between the thighs as the womb retracts and the hemorrhoids appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you lie down and place your hands under the patient's knees, and quickly make an incision with those you have in your hand.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if your hands do not have them because of the moisture and softness of those instruments, then take others made of rough cloth or fine or flaxen thread, and use those you call ties, and quickly make an incision and sprinkle some powdered caustics over them near the incision, so that they act like a cautery; or cauterize those as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with the other treatment as they heal.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then incise the patient with a small bite of a cautery, and wash it with the urine in the bladder that will evacuate slightly when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you grasp them with your finger or pinch them with forceps, incise them, and apply the remedy as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have incised them, you must sew them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and then draw the hemorrhoids up from the parts above, and make that thread penetrate through the side of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part past the needle, laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with firm structure, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a warm poultice on the anus in olive oil or ointment; place this over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which is inside remain; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or other cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Injuries occur due to the expansion of a crack or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and do not heal well with that medicine, it is customary to cauterize them with the tip of a spatula or your finger when they are moist, and to cover those with a plaster; which prevents their consolidation. Then treat those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you cauterize them with a stronger heat than the first time when they are moist and scraped; then treat those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of abscesses, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it appears as a round swelling similar to a quill head, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains you should treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then ensure that what is within the circumference of the key is cut out, and held with tongs or forceps, and eradicated from its root; and place care for it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in the said chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, rounded tubercle突出在体表上，通常出现在孩子的身上，血管斑点常遍布其中。
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and cut out that part, or tighten it with a string or with a pledget inside.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated against and not against the instrument which we shall say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a formica is a small, fibrous or fistulated swelling on the surface of the body, and when you press against it, it resembles the bite of an ant, and is formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a needle of hawthorn or of hawthorn thorn, and it must be sharp, and place it over the wart between which you contain the ring of the needle from the divisions of its parts; then return your hand around the needle as you enter what is in the circuit of the wart, and place it in the prominence of the flesh, and that you eradicate the wart from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of elm or of iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that over the digit the learning of it may be blunted and the revolution of that [needle] may be reversed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the wart as previously mentioned in the cauterization of athylos at the top of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that you administer with the christeri (cautery).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the cautery is made of silver or tin or elm that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you use, for that which is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cauteries for them should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of striking great and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (not open) like a lion's mouth, narrowing to a fine point; and on one side of the tube there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, with the width of the hole according to the size of the rays, and the larger ones slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm's length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with holes as if wound up; and the space which is between the holes the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert strong raw honey into those holes, using ten pieces of honeycomb or around that amount. Adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is placed in it, stretch the head of the cannula between two distinct points with firm constriction, then cannulate each hole: More specifically, the quality of cannulating each hole is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and make sure it is not too thick nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is laid on their back, elevates their legs and places them there. Then place a cushion under him or a pillow; and then apply oil or honey wax or fenugreek or similar at the tip of the cautery; and insert it into the anus with ease, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses it through two more times with force so that all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the cushion completely. Then remove the rectum and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if one sleeps all through the night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you evacuate the stomach in stomach solution illnesses and its evacuation causes pain, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine cautery, among those cauteries which children are accustomed to.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of the plagues what is suitable for the free and for medicines according to need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why plagues are produced are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or incision of a sword or dagger, or strike with a lance, or with a rod, or with an arrow, or resemble those of similar causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More specifically, the plagues that affect parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the chest, or resemble those of other members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am now recommending the treatment of some plagues by applying that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the memory of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third capitol.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when an injury to the head is simple and not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a blow by a stone or similar object, and has already cracked the scalp so much that it is a large wound and you fear the imminent development of an abscess there, then you should incise and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract from it as much blood as the quantity of its virtue requires, unless some reason prohibiting bloodletting exists, especially if the blood from the wound is scarce.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bloodletting is from the opposite side of the injured part; and care must be taken to prevent the wound from filling with pus, and with food and large beverages.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the wound, if it develops an abscess, apply heat in oil rubbed with a cloth or in a drink that contains astringents.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own exudate and the air has not changed there, apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to a rupture and disfigurement, and the edges do not close with pins, then adjust those with sutures as I will describe in suturing them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound is already exposed to bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but only a small suspensorium, then incise that area and cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh nearby in its proper place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he is accustomed: bread and forms similar to them, until he recovers.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that tissue and drain it, and cure it accordingly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these ulcers an artery or vein through which blood flows can occur, and it cannot be cut by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut one, you cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood is cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these ulcers are simple and small, the cause is light; try to sprinkle this powder over them, which will harden before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts vermilion; mix them all well, sift them, fill the ulcer with this, bind it properly in place, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen that above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is thus not applied, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes one makes this cautery alone, when it is not in your presence the sign of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to have them paused and straightened, and on recent wounds whose blood has not yet been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not place this plaster in its position. But then cure those as we have said, try to pause over those applied bandages that are digestible, or pause over those of flour paste from wheat mixed with water and honey that prevent suppuration; and place the other cure over them while they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a fracture occurs in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then you extract this with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between wounds of the head when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no need for any other treatment but to avoid any curative procedure that causes strong constriction, as some say it is vitriol and resembles it in its effects on nerves and opposes those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the root of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with cold water twice, or some times infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and thyme when washed with cold water and the other herbs minorant according to this manner, and apply a moist ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then perform缝合，或收紧其边缘，然后在其愈合时用粉末进行治疗。
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the buttocks, then perforate that area at the most compressed spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound a vein is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that area, or tie it with a ligature if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the shoulder are already incised or entirely, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound and suture over the bone of the shoulder without touching that; go ahead with that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen that with proper structure for a few days; and later cure that with ointments in which there is astringency and stimulation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already infected the bone, then probe that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can; what appears unextractable, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and is separated and the inflammation around it is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent then powder it with the powder which you have been advised.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure that as well, the details of which will be recalled in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar when made between the shoulders and are caused by spear or by sword or by lance or by similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the depth of the injury is significant, then consider more if the wound has air in it when the patient faints; then you know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you should sprinkle powder on it for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which could cause further harm to the patient; instead, apply an attractive ointment, and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then pause at the openings of the wound like an old woman so that what comes from the humidity may flow; and make the patient lie over the wound so that what is within him flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	And if from the wound more than three days have passed and no spasms or tremors of the heart evil nor constriction of the bile occur, and you use other good dispositions for it, then you may know that the wound is healed; and then treat the one with calaws and the other with another cure until it is cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	And if the healing of it is impossible, and all the time has been opened, then you may know that a fistula is formed; treat it accordingly according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a slash or a knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then treat it with what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if it has already calcified in the bone, and you incise deep, then you should twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separable.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, leave them in place until the swelling subsides, as their removal is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is similar to what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the severe ones, sometimes part of the intestine or the nerve of the intestine is removed, so that their intervention and suturing are more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a minor disruption is made difficult by another method. I believe that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not prevent their intervention in their place promptly, as they open up and become swollen, making it difficult for the instrument to proceed.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two cases mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the stitch of the belly is according to four manners, but two stitches are common and suit the stitches of the other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other stitches specific to the belly communicate with the other parts of the body, but more so are they specifically used in the stitch of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you for each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the part is small and the intestine is displaced by some cause through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, then this occurs in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then know that you should moisten the attempt that you submerge a sponge or cloth in pure wine, or that you soak it in squinancy, cyperus, and spicery, and place the intestine within it until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some instances, I have seen this done where there is hardness, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which aloes and mallows are immersed, for by this it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the intestine is damaged near this cure, then cut the disruption with a small instrument on which veins are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better when it is properly made without sectioning, and not occupation to dry up unnecessarily and cause deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, note its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part not acute, with the tip subtle, but not too fine like a spatula; it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows the natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the original site, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must place the patient on their back, and position their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must place the head and feet higher than the other parts left.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And you must apply this to the large injuries and to the medium-sized injuries.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small injuries, pause what you have prepared and then ensure that the minister is among your most skilled assistants, who holds the disruption with his hand and adjusts the lips of the wound, and then uncover it to see if there is any cause for concern nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counting needle according to the amount of the wound's width; then leave the extremity of the disruption at the tip of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or ensure that you do not place thread in both extremities of the codena, but rather the extremities where the thread from the other parts is left inside, before making it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the thread and two extremities of the codena, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both parts together, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the digit and put another needle there, and then that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be medium in thickness and subtlety, for the thin ones cut the flesh lightly; and the thick ones are difficult to handle, so it is best that they be medium in both subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the wound closely together, for fear that the flesh be cut lightly and that the wound open up before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not led into the wound and harm the sleeper; place your hand over the sutures with powder expanded from all parts, which cover the ends of the needles; leave them there until you can tell that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of suture with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is as follows: for you to perform the suturing of the four extremities, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped evenly in thinness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when you have pierced the four extremities with the needle, return the needle from that thread end where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the wound, thus making the suture as if it were a stitch in fabric where the threads are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place the distance between each suture equal to the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I healed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen which had been cut by a knife, and it was the disruption of the major wound about two palms from the middle of the intestine, and it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part after the intestine had been left open for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then that viscera is moved back to its positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not cure that without ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but I placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would do twice a day and applied frequent moistening with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two specific types of suturing according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along that course straightly according to the right line and length of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then insert the needle from inside to outside in the other end of the stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in the other extremity of the joint from the outer part to the inner part; leave the end of the needle that is on this side, and penetrate the needle in the other inner part from the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the needle penetrate in such a way that it penetrates through the joint at the extremity of the limb where it is on the inner side until all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this metal side and thread it at the extremity that is on the joint on the other side, and withdraw the needle from which it penetrates, and place it in the codena with the extremity of the joint that is on the other side; and withdraw that from the codena which is on its part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you sew all of this from the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin needle on which you sew the skins, endeavoring that you sew the edge once from the end part of the wound, and leave the other half inside until it heals completely.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second species of suture which Gualia teaches is that you sew it with a silk thread on which skilled surgeons sew it, endeavoring that every part is joined to its corresponding part by nature; and apply one end of another to the other end of it, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the end of the wound on your own side of the external part, and make it penetrate into that part from within with two ends of the silk thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside with the other two ends.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those threads, and make each end from within penetrate into the external part at two ends of the wound on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing about which we have previously spoken.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that the suturing of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of these, starting with the insertion of the needle from where you should begin, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the suturing method in which I equalize the layers.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of treatment for boils is the judgment of other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This cause is when you succeed in getting the boil while it is hot from its own pus before the air alters that, and reduce the swelling and缝合它，然后用那种粉末覆盖。
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over it certain ointments which are present among you so that they harden and plug the veins, and be consolidated by chafing and inspected; and proceed to treat it as one would treat other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it frequently, until it begins to granulate and scab over, and change it twice a day as you have been shown, until it is healed, for you would not need other medications in minor disposals when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound might communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-refined oil or in olive oil, and place it around the area between the fingers, leaving the joints uncovered.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their bowels, for several days you must apply it, then crustize that with vinegar or a strong black tincture of tea, especially if the infection has reached the bowel and caused an exitura penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which is from the large intestine is of a milder healing power than that which is in the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing that which the intestine called "gorgon" does not receive cure from plague that falls into it; this is because of the great number of veins in it and its large size, and due to the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you are treating from the plague is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the fresh wound, treat that according to your skill with which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the muscle and is already red or black, when you strengthen that with a cauterization over the area that is darkened, so that it comes to a flow of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another part of the abscess, and place two ends of the cauterization hanging from the cut left by the plague, so that over you it may alleviate the attraction of the plague by closing the opening of the wound and expelling the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, sometimes it can be restored in some individuals. This is why I saw that man who had been wounded in his belly by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, old and caused a fistula, which healed through treatment and reduction.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I sought the cure for it, although it was not yet consolidated in its healing. I managed to subtly integrate that which was healthy into the location where it had been healed and consolidate the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the location already consolidated, I examined the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and no one was found to have this type of injury due to poor diet and breaking their usual habits of eating and drinking, and frequently bathing and exercising excessively.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it should be ligated in this manner: you take large beans; then you adjust the two edges of the wound and place one bean with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it takes hold on those and tightly closes its mouth, you cut off the head of the bean, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another cushion near the first one, and do not cease to make cushions one after another according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and around the wound; and remove those attached heads from the intestine once it is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced with fine needles made from the intestine of an animal, which are finer than a needle; and you should take the end of these intestine needles, which are raw, and place the end of it in fine needles wrapped in the same intestine, then insert those needles into the holes and around the area, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with needles is simply done out of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no visible damage, and does not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure for stone and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague or abscess when wrapped up and allowed to ancient [decay], and becomes a ulcer, and is not consolidated and hangs on for a long time and is not cut out, then in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is named fistula and we call it there a stone.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a hardened, white node, without pain and which has a cavity like the seat of an abscess; therefore named that ulcer rizatz, that is, abscess.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in an ulcer the humidity is present, which hangs on for a long time; and with strong effort the humidity can be removed within some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this humidity is thick, small, large, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously stated in the division, when I spoke of plagues, that any ulcer which is not healed and does not leave naked flesh, is this only for one of nine causes: of which the first is either due to insufficient healing in the body; or due to malice of it; or because between it and the skin there is hard flesh prohibiting natural growth of flesh; or because it is caused by thickened matter; or because that ulcer itself contains pus and the material that flows from it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in in the region, and it is a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region as in Saragossa, where digestion of illnesses is difficult, and recovery from abscesses is delayed naturally; or because there is bone or mixed bones in it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them in medicine are divided.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I will teach you the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; some of which lead to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus of the hand and foot; these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the diseases difficult to cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation. Such is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some fistula is so deep that it does not reach these locations as mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula follows a straight course, inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead being light of its body is relieved and curved to alleviate the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the openings with their own openings, for the moisture that you cleanse there should be relieved of the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire very precisely, according to whatever manner it is possible for you to know if here are veins or nerves, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula with only opening movements and this is over all with the sum of your strength, with your inquiry, with which you question the patient, and with your compression on the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes in true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider then if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a local place, distant from joints, or from nerves, or from arteries, or from veins, or from one of the places which I and you call.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then probe that you enter it in the preon until it is as deep as possible, and then modify it with all its corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a needle.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with the sharp medicine several times until it corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have previously recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that wet part as we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then rush to stop the corruption entirely; and place care for that until the flesh within is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healthy and you graft on a piece of flesh as you do, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then expose again thoroughly and explain its nature and the worldification of it with your final fortification, and restore that area.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, do nothing but leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is bone pain, then you must thoroughly extract all of them, and do not leave any due to a lack of your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if it is caused by some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to expose the bones at this time, then pause over the wound that allows the area to heal, and leave it in a position near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and ensure that the section you have incised remains constricted in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you fear infection, pause over the wound submerged in a triple wash of oil, or in Egyptian balm, or in some green ointment, for when these can heal, and the bones are separated from them, then the swelling will be alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupt in it affects only its surface, then drain that part only behind where the corruption and darkness are stopped, and place the wound again.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is of him is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely excise it from the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you when examining a patient in the thigh to place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and within the parts inside there is corruption about the matter inside the body that has reached the thigh, and the matter is of an abscess, a great abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess is allowed to come to head over a long period due to the error of the doctors, and the matter becomes mature. The cure for it is nearly paused when the leg becomes fistulaed, and you make openings in the sore where all discharge pus and the humidities of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor cures for about two years, and not fire in those who excel in the art, among which I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there is the leg, and the fluids that flowed from it through those openings into the body; and already the condition of that man was entirely swollen, and the color of his skin was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones lead from there to the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I opened and incised over one of the openings, exposing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was terrible, rotten, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I deduced that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which obliterates and constricts, and I already had deduced this.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then proceed to restore the wound with medicinal materials for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And constrict what appears to be that corruption, and then you must perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it is not restored until you incise around a palm's breadth of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the sectioning of it, but rather for the disposition of the patient's fear and the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, for he suffers continuously in all hours due to excessive evacuation leading to bad fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing replaces healthy flesh; it is done well by placing him in the right position in his body and returning his virtue; and he is accustomed to his positions and not subjected to contrary movements or injury for any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the affected area, then you should proceed as follows: You must tightly and strongly bind that part of the bone at its extremity, commanding someone to extend it. Place a thicker woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone is left, and extend the end of this bandage so that it draws the flesh towards the left side. You should uncover the flesh in the area you wish to cut for the blade not to pierce the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, the cut should not pierce the damaged flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Ensure that the cut is small and gradual over the damaged area, for if the damage is inside the bone's cavity and does not appear in its manifestation, you may need to make another incision.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and non-protruding, there is one continuous part attached to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fusts there, and make sure that the cut for the first part where the corruption is is continuous with the closure of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but displaced.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the side of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your ability, and all displacement should be corrected by you, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And consider what are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for each species of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And consider that operation means to you regarding the species of instrument of which you stand in need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of illnesses, then when you have them by you, apply what is convenient for it from the instruments for all illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall list at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use, some of which you will prepare according to your prohibition, which you will experiment with on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another will be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of the ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the shape of the prongs of an astilbe.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not grind them, but use only those to friction the heads of the joints when they are broken, or the large mouth open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of the larger razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of the flat razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another well-made saw: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and its member of a downward-pointing blade well made.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor or other fine:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a beam, and its end is like a point, and it is placed in certain locations in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a beam which you place according to the ratio of that which is pierced in the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and resembles a hollow that contains all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the cutting edge and the jointing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and the cure does not please you, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you did not perceive any cause for, then you must enter that member into this to uncover the corruption, so that the illness may be expelled through death or malice which is a greater misfortune for the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of him upon whom this happens is that the member becomes black before it turns red, as if it were already burned. Or you may notice the blackness within that burning turning into that member which affects it and takes hold of the whole body; therefore, consider thy incision in that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as that of a scorpion, viper, or rattle snake, and its likeness.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it spreads into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the little finger, and do not give space for corruption to enter within where it could take hold in the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you incise that one, then incise the arm between the crease at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the crease, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and another cause must be applied instead for cure, which is an excess of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly incise the foot when corruption surrounds the toe of the foot, then you incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the sole, then you incise the surface between the joint of the sole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the sole, then there is no remedy, and you must leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to incise the member or close it is that you hold the thread in one part and let go of which you want to incise, and hold another thread at the location; extend the assistant's hand with a thread to both parts left, and extend the assistant's hand with another thread on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two threads until all the flesh is exposed within that space; then it should be incised or closed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the location frequently, or place some astringent powders over it to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And ensure that the injured member is held with a thread at a convenient place, and treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if someone finds a spot on their foot, this accident which we and you have advised, is quite common and appears as darkening similar to the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said organ itself, where it tends throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to wait until he sees the cure going to the limb with the intensity of him who feels pain and the heat affecting him, and the infection in that foot enters the joint, and the wound heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time that corruption accidently affects the hand index.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I perform to reflect that the excess affects the hand of the medicine taker, reflecting the body's purification; and the excess is not reflected but begins to move into the other part where it first began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they call me to infect his hand, and I do not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess, more fearing the infection of his hand leading to death, as the virtue of gout was deadly.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that man prepared and infected his entire hand, and he has healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative only to serve as an aid regarding what has been said about this illness, and that it be a sign by which it may be recognized and according to which it may be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of the enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is expelled, leaving the area void as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it is thin like a delicate fabric, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve nor in muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on any member, then it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the adhesion will adhere and that that corruption has not succeeded by a contrary consequence, and on the cord there has passed of face, then you cure that with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the hand that smells has a foul odor, then administer a clyster with that medicine which consists of oil and wine mixed with honey in equal parts, and be sure to adjust them in a vessel, and heat them over fire until the medicine boils and reaches the desired temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; administer this clyster to the sinus, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the wound healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes a clyster is administered with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take ash from vitex, put it in water; then extract the liquid and administer it as a clyster until you are sure that the sinus is cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with thirty parts of myrrh, and prepare another mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes adhesion in the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer that mixture with water to cause flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take spikenard ointment and dissolve that mixture with diluted oil and stringy wine; or you administer that mixture with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the passages of the sinew are wide in which the catheter cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge that opening with a small iron instrument, and place it in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is large, then you should suture the edges and leave enough space for the enema to pass.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the abscess flows is elevated above the lower parts, then dry that area below it so that the abscess can flow out, for when the abscess is compressed in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area below the abscess as you wish, then you should puncture the member and prepare it for the procedure so that the abscess flows out gently according to your ability and without any obstruction of the abscess.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in the place you want, extending them on a piece of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to communicate with the entire sinus; then cut with the scissors along the right side of the sinus opening a slightly wider slit than the sinus opening; next, extend over another piece of linen the lion's ointment according to the size of the slit, and place it above that in a position away from the sinus opening so that the abscess is drained and does not interfere with the cloth for several days only once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out what is inserted in it with the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adherence, then when you remove the dressing, immediately change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the sinus there is a subtle virus present, then do not waste time waiting for its adherence, for the healing of it approaches, for some people take longer for flesh generation in their wounds, and in those, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days the sinew is situated near the limb in an indigest position, then you shall perceive that the sinew does not adhere; and if adherence of the sinew is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as ointment liniment when there is an excess of addition of fat.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the one that is more recently injured, you should take ointment liniment and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply an old piece of cloth in its substance, and compress it with something soft, and use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And make it seem in that action when there is no limb, liniment fat, honey when mixed in that it is thickened, and use this; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and mix all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and then line it with something soft, and strengthen it over the sinew; and line it with the honey which you have mixed in that it is thickened, and powderize over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes administration is made to him of long pepper and reasons of celestial mallow (and the celestial mallow) and powder of err and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted, squeeze them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and investigate in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it by fistula treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of tumors, fingernail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger of the hand or foot loose, and is hard in other fingers, and as it is prolonged, its healing is less valued; or it is a chronic apostema from a deep-seated one, or it is corrupted, and a branch enters where you corrode the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupts that part, and spreads its corruption to the bone within which it gives off an odor; and the extremity of the finger is amputated, and the color of the wound becomes yellowish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not apply your cure, then proceed to insert all the superfluity that is discharged from the joint and nearby, and place a cautery on that area, for a cautery movement is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is so and the joint is healthy, and the swellings of the joint have already compressed the flesh to the inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead that, then proceed to pause a thin ray under the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push that up and cut that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh from the medicines burning corrosively until it be thoroughly resolved; and place a salve over that until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered the bone, then proceed to cut out the bone there and remove it, for no time will heal what is corrupted in the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and the corruption going into the same area, then proceed to cut there in one of the joints according to where the memory of its location is preserved, and place a salve over it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if at the joint there is percussion or friction, and the pain is very severe, then you should start by venesection at the site of pain, and immediately dry the joint with an incision using sharp transverse sections of the skin, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh left by the joint, for you will thereby cause the patient severe pain, which will be due to the natural condition of excessive flesh in excess in that place; and cure that area with what alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But this is adjusted, which is natural in many people, the flesh is very strong and heavy, or the bones are very strong and heavy, or the joint is very strong and heavy.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And in some it is located at the site of the joint, or the natural condition is strong and heavy in certain nodules of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is natural in certain nodules of the fingers is not painful, and this which is located at the joints is more painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are natural fleshly, the incision is light, and you should cut there with a sharp lancet.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is; therefore, beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult for those born near the kneecap, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around in a round cut into the bone, and nearby will be one of those convenient grooves for this, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers among their joints due to observed swellings or by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning, then ensure that you heal this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place your hand between the cloths where you have infused oil, so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and shape it to match the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and they are thickened veins filled with melancholic superfluities that move in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel, work, and carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until the expulsion is strong, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More importantly, the treatment for them can be done in two ways: one way is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: apply a compress to the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved and become watery. Then strengthen the patient's thigh by binding it above the knee on the inner side using a bandage, leaving the lower part exposed. Next, compress the vein in one, two, or three places with a broad compress. Using your hand, elevate the black blood from below the groin upwards into the abdomen and then downward. Do this until you have removed the quantity of blood you desire, which is sufficient to alleviate the condition's influence.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then tie her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you lift the thigh of the patient, if there are hair roots on it, then immerse it in warm water and wrap the thigh with wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins swell; or exercise it forcefully if warm water is not available, until the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the skin along the vein by sectioning it lengthwise or at the rear of the limb you may cut it, or lower down at the base.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the skin with scissors and scrape out the vein from all parts until you feel it, and you should notice its appearance as that knot declining to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, after removing the skin, you will see that white thing which is like a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place that part of the sheet elevated and folded from the knee, and suspend it on an iron hook or lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then scrape the knee from above the vein as it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract that and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this where you extract that from the section that is further above or higher than all other sections, once everything is inserted; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert that part of the sheet and move your hand in all directions where it is folded.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and has come over the wound through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of that is done, then place over the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, both roasted and unroasted, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the wound is contracted having curvature in which there is an encircling at the parts, and does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut over it entirely at all parts of its curvature and at the places of its encircling, and place it under supports so that you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult to lift it; use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the cut where the wound is dry:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the support orr:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as with other supports nor of acute extremity because it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having it in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands with tails like those described by Avicenna in the lands of Arabia and in the dry lands of India, which have little strength and in which neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain thus like snakes and worms and lice and other worms breeding between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this is when you encounter in the leg inflammation; nearby the area becomes blisters; nearby the vein starts to swell at the place of that blistering, as if it were a plant sprouting.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, immediately cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachm, or two drachms, and press it there, letting the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as any cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and anoint that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside inserted, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and corruption in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because the abscess must be treated vigorously and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the rear of the patient, and no cause should affect the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have been incised whose length is about five palms and I have been informed that one was incised measuring twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that long tract through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then treat it according to the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has bumps, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and blood flows into it through several openings, each of which is like that.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and what was said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This sickness is named in some lands as the bovine disease or gout, because it often affects cows and a few worms live in them, which are native between the tendon and the flesh, and go up and down throughout the body, and are shown by their own movement from one member to another, breaking the tendon and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms and snakes and worms (lombrics) and ascarids occur in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and affects the vein, then greatly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and thereby often causes bumps.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not proceed without considering its natural movement and appearance in relation to the sensation, then confirm that you have what is above it and what is left of it with liement and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find it spreading to the head near the neck, then apply strong constriction over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, then extract it; and confirm that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that evacuate corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on the disease of gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called gout in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is passed from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I will describe that according to which I will treat it.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After an hour, that swelling moved upward like vermicelli boiling, though less urgently than porridge, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that area increased, and a hard lump formed in the muscle. Soon after, it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it also appeared in the other arm, moving to the opposite side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was advised that she should move her body thoroughly. It was marvelously surprising to see the change and the rapid movement from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my hands in that manner, but I have observed movements where the pain is perceived to be permuted from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have heels as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider this to be the case, but rather because the woman was of an emaciated body with dry organs and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that swelling changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are fleshy and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the healing of the foot, and the patient feels that pain, when it does not appear as apparent as we have said regarding the heel, then firmly press on that area and slightly and gently place something over it where the swollen vein has subsided, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it at the base of the heels, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel the swelling, and purge those with foul-smelling pills and with snake-root pills and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	For the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they lodge. The diversity of these lies in those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, and silent ones, which are solid; and those that have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet where they lodge is according to two manners: for the members or are principal causes, thus like the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it lodges in any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will relate closely, then cover that arrow in those where death is at that in the major dispositions, and when to you do not appear these evil signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of apoplexy, when it lodges in the brain, and pierces through the bone, and is situated above the ventricle which is over the brain, for it happens by sudden violence, dizziness, and nausea, and redness and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and much weakness, the word is cut off and the voice destroyed, and is situated at the site of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and its appearance similar to the humidity of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there which is not visible; and the movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the dark black blood, and the coldness at the extremities, and the shiver, and the syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends upon him wholly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are the spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are pulsating, and the color of the patient has changed, and he breathes heavily or gasps for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain along with heavy breathing, and not all the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, then strongly apply a leaf of undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, and it is embedded there, apply a leaf of undigested food to the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for its cure without extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and exits through urine, and the process of it causes pain in any part outside, then strongly feel pain in the thigh, know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, helper bone, dorsal vertebrae, furcula, and coxa, along with their counterparts of the limbs, are saved according to the major disposals when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding their cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the eyelid of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in his eye at the gray of his eyelid, leaving the eyelid but removing the arrow which was partially hidden and could not be retrieved except for a small extremity attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron lion where there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is intact, and was not injured in his eye at all.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was embedded in the shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was submerged in his shoulder; then I touched it delicately, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extracted another arrow from a man which was embedded in his abdomen, and observed that he died from that; therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to his condition, incised over the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and no ill happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow had struck his side, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incise the arrow near the hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman to whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in her bodily functions, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man to whom an arrow had struck his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken, not causing any additional pain, and he appeared much like this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extracted the arrow from the king's prince, who had an arrow wound in the middle of his nose, and it had already shifted slightly to the right nostril, with the entire arrowhead hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the cure of him near the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you examine the wound of the arrow closely; and then you inquire about the one that feels subtle, and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture and left his right ear, and then you suspect that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the place to be applied where there is an attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place we apply it so that the location of the arrow appears to me, to dry up there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not neglect the significant place where the arrow hit; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without neglecting anything; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and you treat the malaise from the extraction for a period of several days until one day I feel the arrow inside its sheath and this happened to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it burns; and over the surface, touch it, and examine the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine where I visibly see the tip of the arrow appear, and pass to my time through the space of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that area, and without using any other instrument, I do not cease to refine and invent methods for this, until one day I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made according to the form which will be described at the end of this chapter; then I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, and no scar remained in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little on motion; and from what is present to what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are embedded but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place into which they entered; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place into which it entered, or the arrow proceeding into a fleshly place and being shot out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the guess of the hour at which it entered, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and the attraction and its exit can be alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey your guess, then leave that for a few days and apply attraction and movement to it each day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your attempt for several days, then you must puncture in the circuit of the arrow at that site of any part traveling subtly where the location is enlarged by the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already pierced one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient several days later from those accidents which you call, then avoid the extraction of the arrow and leave it where its being equilibrates for several days; or if the arrow reaches the brain, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone of the body only and does not pass into the brain, but remains in the patient for several days, and you do not encounter any causes of those accidents, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly lodged and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and proceed to cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you incise the flesh in which it is embedded as much as possible with all the skill you can muster; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot extract the flesh from the fracture of the ears or in torsion of those parts.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then you use your hand in a twisting motion with forceps at all parts where it complies; and with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it be made easy for its extraction and for this procedure.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that side of your turn, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then again operate on that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it causes you contrary condition of pain, then you administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer ease in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facility, tranquility, and slowness as I have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which you fix the end of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And for the arrows that are forced in contrary to the other part, or that you have already treated some part of them externally, or increase the swelling at the end of the arrow by the sensation of the part more above the thigh; then you extract from there; and the extraction is according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it should be made light with evisceration.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the bone according to the contrary direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and expand it by inserting, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	But if not, leave it for a few days, and then reinsert it where it pierced.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it resists, stir it around with a curved instrument so that the concavity of the instrument enters the groove of the arrow, and then push it in.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is curved, then push it with strong stirring into it, so that the arrow straightens out from it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you draw out all the flesh in which it is located, as much as possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, then dry it over that area where you touched it, and guard yourself from cutting a vein or nerve, extract it, and later apply a dressing to the wound while it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If the ends are like the beak of a bird and are made such that they grip the arrow when placed over it, so as not to let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these forceps are made of special types, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the shape of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the concave trough at this end is made like the beak of a bird so that it aids in extracting the arrow from the wound, and presses against the dull part of the arrow.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing a deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, in order that the instrument may be eased into the concave arrow and be pressed thereagainst.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed, located in the sixteenth chapter, are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Alhasisain; two herbs that are prominently visible on the temple regions; and two veins near the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspirants; one vein in the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegus (or jugular) veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic;— and two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five; of which one is cephalic and is of the wild ivy; the people call it “the vein of the head,” sorda (deaf), and it is a median vein, composed of one branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic; they call this public one “the vein of all the body,” while the basilica is the vein that is located in the domestic ivy and is called “citillar,” and the vulgar ones call it “the vein of the belly”; the funis (or superficial) branch, which is located on the brachial artery and is applied over the elbow, is the one in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears above the wrist through a clear manifestation. The salvatella (or transverse vein), which is the vein between the aforementioned auricular and the smaller one, is located on two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild vine; and the second is sophena, and its place is in the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is in the curve of the wild vine; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, migraines, headaches, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sowing those is as I will recount to you: it should be rubbed on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back of the skull in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then firmly press the patient's side with a band where the two places of their veins are close to the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you want that on your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those on your right hand, here sow it by test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be inserted, and place it near the vein between where the bloodletting will reach the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand to the vein and its parts above, incise the vein with an oblique incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or near to that; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has already been described at the beginning of the book regarding the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries that are adjacent to the temple for the youth of bloodletting, it is an ancient and wicked headache, as well as chronic conjunctivitis and a body full of acute effusions in the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting there is as I will recount to you: tighten the patient's neck with your hand between which the two veins appear by clear perception, and let the pulse of their wrist be felt by your thumb; and then you can proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the flebotomy incidentially leaving it there, elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient's abdomen, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and powder there with a strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And after the recollection of their symptoms, and following that, the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the limb.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the procedure for bleeding from the vein of the forehead is similar to the cephalic venous bleed in ancient maladies of the face, including headaches, inflammation, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bleeding from the forehead is as I will recount to you; it is that the patient strengthens his neck with a bandage under which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named a fossor, this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the point where it is at the top of the cavity above that vein and strike over it either upright or for another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation in the patient and strengthen it so that it may heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes the space is opened by venesection on the side, but I do not know if the venesection should be of acute extremity as with other venesections, or of lateral extremity, and perform the venesection across the bone, for it is close by and strong; breaking the bone with the venesection when it is too delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More importantly, the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the eyebrow due to redness and swelling in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the venesection is that the patient's pulse strengthens with a cloth bandage, and then perform the venesection on those veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the femoral incision along the transverse direction for a short length, just a little, as in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is fine, strengthen the extremity of it to be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood run until it is necessary, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for one night, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More importantly, the femoral incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense thirst, as well as facial illnesses, migraines, and rash that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient strains his neck, and then places his nose to your left hand, takes the fine long incision tool, and places it in the middle location of the nasal tip according to the correct direction, for the vein does not appear here, and thus the blood begins to flow quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Gently close the incision with your hand and let the blood flow as necessary; then remove it after one night, for it is restored somewhat quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constriction of veins and to the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and bad corrosive ulcers similarly as with phthisis.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his side with flax; and the surgeons are over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually make the femoral incision along the length with a femoral incision that is initially ample but becomes smaller and smaller; and extract blood according to the season, a certain quantity, or according to what is necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And gradually remove the flax and firm up the two veins with a mid-string tension so that the patient is not overheated, and leave enough space in the wound for the plague to heal.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the femoral incision for the Algeric veins, it brings relief from small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malae, and strengthen its neck with a bandage, then rotate the labia and look for two veins, one on the right side of the labia and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so is in the circuit of those small black veins; then incise each by an incisive cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if doubt remains to you, and you do not know which is which of those, then understand the incision of the larger one of those, and that which is more evident among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the labia above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is customary to incise both veins that are in the labia.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And of the two veins that are left, the treatment for the tongue is close to the femoral incision at points that are in the groin, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing a femoral puncture is to follow the patient's thighs in front of their groin, elevate the vein from below, and observe the vein, noting one side of it turning black and the other side turning black, noting the color change of each.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform a femoral puncture on each side; and beware that you do not end the procedure by mistakenly puncturing arteries, for they are close to the surface.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are punctured in the crotch are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the femoral puncture is performed according to two methods: either place a thorn or olive needle of fine thickness; or use a surgical knife for the puncture, and call it a nessel. This is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this nessel is to incise carefully and of those specific thin halves according to the width of the veins and the structure of those veins.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of femoral puncture with a thorn:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the wound be as you see, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of large apparent flowing vessels, and at those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method for phlebotomy in olive patients:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser breadth and finer extremity, and it is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins containing thin yellow blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More so, the youth of the phlebotomy from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the blood of the maladies that are left to the gualayro and the col, and from what affects the foot, the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to handle it well and be overly cautious with it, for if he leaves an artery there, and if he err and adjust the puncture of the phlebotomy improperly, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood. Therefore, you must not perform a strong phlebotomy before cutting as with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by clear manifestation, then change to the other one, or seek some branch there; or perform a flebotomy in that place at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and dry that with a flebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you wish the flebotomy of the metysse, then before the stricture of the arm, touch the place between where you know the location of the pulse, and then place your hand over it; then raise the arm and dry the vein with a concave section of the flebotomy as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur in any space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you observe, as you strengthen the ligament, inflammation occurs in the place you marked with your hand; that inflammation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you observe the blood flow in the flebotomy as red as a child's urine, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is the blood of the artery; then lift and place your hand for a long space over that area; and approach that hand, and if the blood stops, for several moments are stopped, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient warm, and afraid of it, and do not wet that part for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop, and sometimes you must not apply medicine to it, when you incise the artery, see if its extremity is constricted, and by stopping the blood; or that which comes from a fistula, and do that, and take half of it and strengthen that over the location of the vein with strictura descente using lime and powder on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is stopped, that is good; otherwise, cure that with what preceded in the memory of the location of the powder-stopping blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood in such small areas due to the location and the possibility of the arm closing up is difficult.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part above the head and from the part below the body; for this reason, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the femoral region during the phlebotomy when it is over-tender in the phlebotomy of the leg; for leaving it would be a nerve; and then if adjusted in the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, it will happen to him stupor, and recovery is difficult, and it is rare that he is fully cured. This nerve appears with vibrations in sensation; and if hidden to some men and is subtle and not shown, then cover the phlebotomy where you puncture with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And do this properly, if you want to puncture for an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; for it is pure blood from all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, however, you should perform the veneflecing that you guard in such a way that with the veneflecing you do not puncture the head of the vein solely, and seek the location more lightly, and do not notice it, if it is not grabbed by the first percussion which is over that area during the veneflecing several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, however, an abscess is often found in some people, when it is not venefleced in the first percussion, then do not notice it again in that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the veneflecing and the accidents related to it are matters that you should carefully consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that veneflecing should be administered only for the conservation of health and with hope for it and caution regarding the occurrence of diseases, and that the veneflecing should be performed on one of the veins in the groin: cephalic, basilic, and femoral; and that the veneflecing should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals, when signs of engorgement appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a fistulotomy should be made, and on the third day or at the first hour of the day after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more urgent the fistulotomy is administered, the more it should be done when it provokes convenience and necessity, whether at night or during the day, at any hour, and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let the child not be fistulotomized before it has four years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be fistulotomized until the fourth month of pregnancy, and old women who have passed their sixtieth year should not be fistulotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when anyone wants to be fistulotomized in any manner, let their intestines be modified before the fistulotomy by using a leech clister, if there is any retained wound or tear, so that the veins do not discharge superfluous fluids during the fistulotomy of the intestines, which are purged, and do not affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let patients who are nauseous, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or drunkenness not be fistulotomized until they have recovered from these conditions. Similarly, let fistulotomy be performed more frequently when there is a passing colic, vomiting, abdominal distress, frequent intercourse and work, and fasting or vigil, as well as any cause that dissolves virtue, either bodily or spiritual.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the scab is large, with foods and beverages, and with medicines if this is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse in bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise for the sake that the scab be subtletied.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so at about the hour of three, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is labor and superfluous pain or copulation and things similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her service, have the causes be present for the use of which custom among men is based on aromaticity and odor, and with balsams and things similar according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is purer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the flap knife two or three times; and tightly bind the wound with a bandage and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tempered, or when the stricture is not equal, or when the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then prohibit the body from flowing blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the stricture is near, have that which is to be incised rubbed with his hands between them while the veins are swollen and made evident by sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And when making the incision, apply a little antiseptic oil to the incision properly; and place your finger of the left hand on the vein, leaving the location where the incision is to be made, so that the vein slightly protrudes and the percussion is clear, for it is the vein which you find as if a string escaping. From those veins, choose one that is full of venosity; when you pause the incision over this area, it contracts, revealing the correct location; and the incision does not open the vein, and if it does open, it is because the vein is narrowed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this know that the phlebotomist should be fixed and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good. Otherwise, you repeat this for another round, leaving that place a little, or apply more pressure if the area has not become inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area has become inflamed, or the sore has suppured, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not apply too much pressure, for it would force the abscess to burst forcefully, nor should you put it in hot water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the vein is slightly closed, and you fear that it might not bleed enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust based on the appearance. Do so with more pressure before the area becomes inflamed, for when the area does become inflamed, you should use less pressure.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not operate on it, for it is not necessary for any reason; instead, place your hand over some part of the wound's edge, for it alleviates the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the wound of oil in all lymphotomies where they cut the veins; they should prohibit the use of wounds for stopping bleeding, and do this by tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood is clarified and circulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated in the lymphotomia site, where many boils occur, especially in those that have not been bled but only that one time, or during the indication of the small vein, then you should apply, and place your hand over the area a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And ensure that he does this near the confluence of the blood from that vein with another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenishness in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over that a cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of hellebore juice or vinegar or its resemblance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when blisters and boils occur, you should perform bloodletting from the basilica vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If at that time you find it soft, apply a compress to that area; when that boil is bad and evil. Then be sure to use something as we have said, for strong pus will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, to make the area tougher, and then treat it with the other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And ensure that you extract from the abscess all fluid according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the pus as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the pus is black, let it stand until it resolves; similarly, if you see it thick, let it stand until it becomes more subtle; similarly, if it is sharp, let it stand until its acuity is lessened.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when the swelling is hard and there is a need for one-time extraction of the abscess, enlarge the incision in the vein and let the abscess drain.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when it is soft, do the opposite, make multiple incisions and drain it gradually.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venous phlebotomy is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy avoids the flow of pus and the injury to nerves, and is more commendable and safer than venous phlebotomy based on length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which syncope is accustomed to occur after phlebotomy, make sure you cure it before the phlebotomy with a small dose of wine infused with milgrana or simple oxymel; and then extract from the wound in three or four incisions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a massage with essarop of myrrh or essarop of aromatic honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant essarop.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you encounter syncope, perform a femoral incision, as it is caused by the cessation of vital blood flow. Then have him drink water from meat and sip a subtle fragrant broth; use aromatic substances like aleo, and apply them to his feet with this.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply a fomentation from which the femoral incision is for principal evacuation, and the virtue of which is cold, gradually evacuating the blood, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if you want to cool his arm, and gitar his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral incision.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if you want to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction of where it is declining, do this after it has cooled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that body in which there is a wound has been cauterized and is acute and causes fever, ensure that the blood is let all at once and in great quantity, and amplify the sensation so that it might cause syncope; but you must have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to keep the body from dying instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as if those of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with great urgency and slightly extend it, for this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it remain until the second phlebotomy is performed; or wait for the effect of the first phlebotomy to subside as the blood coagulates in the veins; or place your hand on the typhus arnica or sage, and apply a light compression until the blood has settled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the sore according to the method, and there is no excuse, then you let it flow to that same place or to the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised in place of the superficial or basilic vein, when they are not visible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the incision is that the patient inserts his hand into cold water while the vein becomes noticeable by its reddening.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then press firmly with the litharge paste at the midpoint; and then incise according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide, and your incision for the vein there at the joint of the hand small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you are forbidden the flow of the blood, then you immerse your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead suspend the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the savatella of the right hand is related to the ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy from this vein is that you press the hand with flax or with your own hand, rather than keep it in trailing water, until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; then quickly perform the phlebotomy at the transverse point; and if you incise this completely, it will not harm you.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And ensure that you do not place your hand too close to the flebotomi, for then you leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in the water basin and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not immerse it in the water basin, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt to prevent it from being completely consolidated; similarly, ensure that you do this for all related areas.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover, for the youth of the flebotomy from the left hand, it is that you consult on the illnesses of the liver.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the flebotomy of the leg as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the saphenous vein in the flebotomy is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as liver diseases, and menstrual retention, and illnesses of veins and old ulcers of thighs and chests, and their similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient's foot enters into cauda lago and makes friction on that area where the veins appear; a cord is tied around the joint of the foot; in that place, the vein which is apparent must be cut off, and from there its branches spread out in the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore perform the femoral incision more widely or place the leg so that the vein is cut off and the connection of the leg is better and cleaner.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the femoral incision in the face of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left over on the face of the foot, and place your incision parallel to the one you make across, as if you were going to divide it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the letting of the blood is prohibited; then you wet the foot in cauda lago and let the blood flow in that area where it is to be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletter err in the first cut, then iterate at the femoral region a little, where the location is salt; and fear not its malignity, but rather guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make the incision on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said you should leave the bone of the leg with the parting of the wild hair.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the danger of bloodletting is pain in the hip when it is due to a cut wound.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient enters the bath, exercises and strengthens his thigh with a bandage of linen placed above the bone above four fingers, so that it does not appear externally.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then bloodlet at that site according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the transversal, which is better; or incise there by incision or extract there by extraction, for the location is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is especially in men that this is observed; and if you find it, and it does not appear by the sense of touch, then incise a branch of it, and that one appears on the back of the foot opposite the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the fluid flow from the vein in the quantity you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and place your hand over the incision site to strengthen it, so that it heals slightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are of the heart, or the lungs, or the eyes.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that involves incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And at the points where incisions are made for bleeding and draining abscesses, there are four locations of the body, of which one where points are placed is on the occiput, and is the last part of the head; and the better location of the two parts of the neck in half; and points of the chin leave the jaw behind and then the mouth; and points of two spatulas; and points of alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and points of two forks, and are of two brasses; and points of two tibias; and points of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And for the points, do not drain the abscess but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as with bloodletting; nor should a point be made with fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion until the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity causes us to make points for an illness or during its continuance, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men where the blood is multiplied during digestion and is extracted by ventilation and finds gravity and sourness in their head; and among them are those who find fullness and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and among them are those who find pain in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and among those who feel the place of their ventilation; and among them is that their laughter is multiplied; and among them is that they find taste of blood in their mouth, or that the tongue is swollen and spits blood; and among them is that their sleep is multiplied, and among those who see blood in their sleep redness, burns, and other causes like theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when times occur for any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be performed more than two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the purpose of neck ventilation is that when you apply gravity to the head and what is embedded in the eyes; more important is that this be close to the complete evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventosa is in the place of craniotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it would cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, you should not use those that are inflamed, and in which there are gouty affections.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More so for those that are continuously inflamed over them, causing forgetfulness; and for this reason, you should command the cupper to place his hand slightly on the cup at the affected parts,以防造成记忆丧失。
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More so, the cupping of alkehel is in the place of craniotomy for the jugular and basilic veins: and for this reason, it helps with asthma, and with the constriction and scission of the vein, as well as coughs and swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And you should slightly warm the alkehel cup, for if it is left cold on the skin, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of alhagdahan affords relief to headaches and ophthalmia, migraines, pre-focal pain, and toothaches; it is in place of basilica phlebotomy.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And make sure you command the attendant not to press too hard at the scarification point so as not to injure the artery and disrupt the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the application of heat allows the mentum to provide relief for alcohol in the mouth, for gum decay, and for appearances associated with illnesses in the mouth, which are in place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is found in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the application of heat on both spatulas provides relief for caphatan, which is performed by restoring temperature.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the application of heat to both internal divisions of the femoral regions provides relief equivalent to phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic. For that releases blood from all those veins more numerous that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the larger ones through which the release reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the fan to blow not too strongly during incision, for the area is naked of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a fan with which air is blown and you apply it to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers, but leave them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure to command the fan to be a large fan, made of reed, for the area needs strong dryness; and use strong light reed fans for incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More fans on the legs reduce swelling by manifest diminution, for they drain the fluid from all parts of the body, and relieve ancient pains in the thighs and the liver, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve boils and sores; and are in place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and hanged, and of two calves.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they also thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the fans used for hanged patients, the youthfulness is considered appropriate to the fans of two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the vesicles is that you place the blister at its beginning very well and let it drain by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the vesicles, but pause them lightly, and remain in those positions for a while, so that the humors come to the place through equal advent.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until the place is already reddening and swelling, and the signs of inflammation appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and continue the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body further.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If the person has tender flesh due to cold, ensure that you incise only once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the blister maker to increase the incision slightly and then reduce the suction by facilitating it.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blister is large, then you must incise twice, with the first incision opening the way for the subtlety of the blister and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second regarding the inspection after the extraction of the large abscess.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the pus is thick, then let a scarification be done on the fourth day so that it may drain.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the pus little by little or only a little, suffice it for us to make a scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want the extraction of thick pus, make a deep scarification; and if we know that the pus is large, then we must perform it with a scalpel.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are wide, we must apply the sites of the cups gently, openly, and fully resolved; if it is in summer, then use olive oil from aloes or olive oil from violets, or two-part olive oil, or olive oil from honeycomb; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or pus oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, wipe it, then apply olive oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or antheric oil, and ones like them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the fan is of wide parts with fleshy flesh, then it should be prohibited to use oil, and instead, the areas of the fan near the wind should be washed with cool water or cold water from a basin, or water from a chest, or water from a caldron, and similar substances should be used in those places.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that which the pain is due to moisture, wash its fans with wine, or water from myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that which the excesses are large, wash its fans with old wine, or water from santonic, which is marjoram, or decoction of antheric, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be kept before bathing; having this, it should be administered shortly after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the fan.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done that the wind-driven disorder and the phlebotomy be conducted before the release of winds.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When you consider the beginning: when the wind doctor or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has sharp pain and inflammation, then you should take cooling causes, such as vinegar milks, endive in vinegar, lettuce, saffron, julep, and their like.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as lentils, pigeon meats, and well-seasoned foods, and those like them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for him of whom the colic is due to cold, take in his drink essaroop of almond, or essaroop of saffron seeds, sumac, and wine flavored with myrrh between vinegar and honey; and let it be commanded that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid lentils, beans, pistachios, small pigeons, and squabs.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And you should ensure that his drink is greater than his food on the day of wind treatment and phlebotomy.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink in some hours to some men hemlock, or medicines of mustard, mustarded or linseed before ventilation or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound be subtletied; and it should not be allowed them to take any food.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Let the vents that are his scarifications be vents placed on the liver, and over the gout and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the side of the abdomen, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those scarifications but for the drawing of blood from a limb, just as we apply a cupping ventosa on the breast in sickness of flux of blood from the blood of the nostrils; and we use that to dissolve the fixed phlegm in the limb, just as we apply it to the belly and the umbilicus; for that rarifies the limb and draws out the fluid and alleviates the pain by dissolving the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the gout when it occurs in their passage or foot, for by virtue of its strong drawing power, it alleviates the pain and removes the swelling from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when it is placed on the liver and spleen, one should relieve distension in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these distensions are administered often with suction solely; and sometimes with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes these distensions are administered full of clear water in the illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the distension should be full and larger, so it should be clear water alone or water in which suitable herbs are added.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the distension administered with fire: let the width of the orifices be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the probe be half a palm; and be in the size of the probe, in the location that is in the circuit, the size of the probe, I take it to be small according to the quantity that enters it with an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of elm wood or citrus wood, coarse and large, equal and firm so that it does not lead the member to deviate from its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place a candle at the midpoint of the thigh, either of wood or iron, where it is placed near the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this large bellows be greater than that which we have mentioned; and the smaller mouth according to the ailments and the condition of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the bellows for children and those who are weak are different from those for young people and pregnant women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this bellows near fire on the member is to extend the mechanical part of the bellows near a small candle of wax, and place that near the midpoint of the thigh in the center of the bellows, so that the fire is ignited around the area where the candle is placed to prevent the patient's body from burning.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place it near the member of the patient, and let it be over the tube as we have said. When we have the bellows and do not need to hold it, and let the vapor rise over that tube, then the bellows will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the pincers according to their manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of ventosa for the illness of pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the body part only as needed.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of the ventosa: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members where the position of ventosas is impossible due to their small size, such as the tongue and similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and lips and similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found sanguissuguas in two-boiled waters purified.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And after let them lie in warm water until they are relaxed, and that no cause of inflammation remains in their belly; then let the body be evacuated at the beginning by venesection and by purges; then rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; then place them over a pillow.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, apply purging to the area, especially in younger patients.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with water mixed with vinegar and then apply and rub it well.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding from the wound is prolonged near the site of the sanguissugation, and if this persists, then insert a cold cloth into the water, and place it there until the exsudation subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle vitriol trissat or pieces resembling the styptic causes over it, until the bleeding is stopped; or place cloths soaked in decoction of fava beans on the area, and let them remain there until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding is reduced.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent bleeding occurred or insert a needle at the sites that are about to bleed; and place them there, until the bleeding stops when felt.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to decrease, powder the area with a little bitter almond, or salt, or ashes, and apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the procedures of the fourth part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary advice in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that this chapter is taught by physicians, vulgar remedies, and those who have not recently read the works of the Ancients or even glanced at their writings.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it after much study; and I have acquired this knowledge not through what others teach but through long reading of the works of the Ancients and studying them with understanding to extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct the experiment and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiments have passed; now I abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from the occupation of expansion; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and show this at the end of declaration; and form this into motas forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summarize and collect the essential information on fractures of bones, those which require preliminary attention before we begin the recollection of various bone fractures and their diversities.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Begin then by saying what we will discuss in the prologue of this chapter; and the chapters to which the craftsman must be attentive at the beginning, so that they stand on the truth of those. It is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or consolidation, whenever you approach the beginning with ligation or to draw out that part, or any of them together, if no cause is prevented, such as weakness of virtue, or it is one on which an effect occurs, or very old in decrepitude, or is at the time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore it is content in food consisting of fresh herbs and of meats of partridges and of crabs; and we prohibit fatty meats and fullness from foods and from all food that fills the veins with scum, until you are secure of abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of the disease.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed on nutritious foods rich and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and other similar foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is made slightly and with honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones crack in those men who are in the first vitality and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuous and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying of those limbs, and those that are of them at the end of infancy, thus like the bones of young animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Yet nature adjusts and amends over the broken bone from any part due to a cause resembling glue in which it thickens and adheres strongly, joining them together at the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, yet no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fracture according to the different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the arm; and likewise all other members are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I review my memory of all species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures in bones are diversified; for some are caused by an arcuate fracture or one that occurs at the sutures; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those from the sagittal suture and tiles, and additions both proceeding and not proceeding, just as when a pen is prepared to write, there can be a fracture by a break and disruption in the head, or a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is a specific method or torture in restoration, according to the recall of it, which will be distinct in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this it is known that a bone fracture has occurred: there is distortion of the limb, and an prominence or bump can be perceived through touch, as well as the pain felt when pressing on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is neither apparent distortion nor pain, you should touch the bone with your hand with some force and if the patient does not experience much pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is distortion or a small fracture, so test it by touching the area with your hand and applying compression; then place your hand over the medication area where you perceive a slight swelling at that spot; and it will likely be straightened by subtle contraction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you will know that the area is curved and not split into two or more parts as does not happen in such cases, when the entire part of its composition is inflamed; then you should begin your treatment to straighten it out, keeping an eye out for the formation of a boil.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs in him, let that be left for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and of ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and piercing of it are lighter than the one in which you have occasioned.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And place it firmly according to the recall of it that will come.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you have occasioned it, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you place the member in alignment according to its natural shape, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you must force yourself to return those additions with ingenuity and according to any method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And see to it that your strength is such that you do not cause harm or injury to the patient through your operation, nor pain; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess due to their operations or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen from their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, achieve equilibrium and a proper operation of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make sure they do not aggravate it during their waking hours and while sleeping, observe its revolution and agitation, and regulate its excretion, and all of its movements with your entire virtue; wait until the position of the limb is in a position where the pain is secured, for the cause of the pain or injury is when it feels discomfort in the position of the limb. When this happens, ensure you change it to another position where no pain is felt; and observe that the position itself is straight and equal, so that when the limb is restored, it does not incur any distortion.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the affected member is that which I describe; so that you may know that the broken members vary in their smallness and in their size and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the said thigh and similar to those, cover them with a fine thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, cover them with an external and firm wrapping, for the firm dressing connects the large and strong member from all sides at the fracture evenly, ensuring that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, gradually with your dressing, gently apply three or four wrappings according to the part; and firmly hold your hand a little on the wrapping.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and firmly ensure that your hand is near where you have secured the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually extend the wrapping around the fracture site a little, and gradually soften the tension little by little, while you take from that place a large amount.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other layer around the injured area covered with wrapping, and gradually bring the wrappings to the part past the fracture; and let your operation be in the tension of the wrapping and in the softening of that according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stopa (or a cloth) between the wrappings to equalize the tension of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize on these wrappings, stitch them properly as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area. Otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess there and which causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the stitches.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the staves of the cane for the left side be straight and well-formed; or made of ash wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stave be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But ensure that the stave which is placed over that fracture be thicker and slightly longer than the other staves, and the length of the stake according to what is read regarding the member's magnitude and minuteness; and then strengthen on the other bandage according to your first stricture; and properly fasten above with a decent bandage as we have said about the stricture, and it should be your stricture more in that place of the fracture, and the more extended from the fracture, the less the stricture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of flax; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some surgeons padding their thread cords with flax, it is a great error when fitting the stricture to equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And similarly, thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to fit the stricture with them as you wish, and it should not be that there is less than a finger's breadth between staves.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the site of constriction in those areas, then place there those of stopa made from lion's mane or carded wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by a blow, and accidents leading to disruption in the chain, and you will find them remembered in that at the Capitol according to their uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for all broken members, they are not set by vessels on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be held still by vessels but may require up to five or more days, according to your safety regarding the onset of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the opening of restoration for fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is done on what you do not apply heat or friction: and it is that you take powder of malt, which is the medula of the flour that results from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you must sew it this way, but first strain the white paste of mustard, and proceed with the thickening of it not too thin; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: mix saffron, dragon's blood resin, acacia gum, fennel seed, and myrrh, all measured in drachms. x; frankincense in drachms v; alcohol in drachms xx; all are to be sifted and strained, then mixed with alcoholic water or mustard paste if the wound is superficial; then use this plaster, which is of good composition, for it restores slightly broken bones and heals the affected area.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster for fractures and sprains: mix myrrh and half a drachm of white althea. x; frankincense in drachms v; acacia in drachms vi; Armenian wax in drachms xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are to be ground in a mortar with the mixture, then strained, and prepared with water or mustard paste and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidents in those areas as well as cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in sweet wine and oil of cedar and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, but of cauterization and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores fractures: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of an abscess: take root of elecampane, chamomile, flowers of violets, bran of rye; mix all parts equally, then boil them in wine, if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is scalded, then dress that with water of fennel moistened or with water and use of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolving an abscess when it is hard: take powder of saffron, of safflower, of balsam, of melilot, of marjoram, of violet flowers, of camomile, and mix them all together; grind them all fine and mix with water of saffron or water of two or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not instruct in this free passage that it be placed over the limb immersed to promote its restoration, but make a cerate of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia be seen as placed over the broken limb to promote its restoration and the causes in which drying of lesser quality so like myrrh, frankincense, and similar to those causes we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of applying a plaster that heals injuries and pain: take equal parts of myrrh, bark of incised human skin or rabbit hide, saffron, and salt; grind them fine and mix with water, then make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When the quantity according to which it is necessary to cut the ligature and then untie it, you should consider if no pain has occurred nor any swelling, and if the bone is not broken nor displaced from its place, then do not untie for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain severe or swelling occurs at the site, then you should cut or untie it immediately, and apply a plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and a sponge soaked in fresh seawater, submerge that in brine, and apply it to the area until the swelling and pain subside; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, cover with well-woven wool soaked in vinegar or rubbed oil, and keep it on overnight until you are certain of no abscess forming, and reduce the swelling of the limb, easing the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeatedly apply that fine plaster and do not tighten your original bandage too much, but keep it subtle until the area is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all these accidents have already subsided and no longer require poultice and bandaging, then you repeat this as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those we have mentioned occurs in the member, then you do not remove it but for about three days or four, or five or seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you judge by the mobility of the member, as we said, until the fracture adheres and rests on the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the bandage tighter than your first bandage, and adjust for the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to whether the recollection of it precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you find that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that nutrition cannot reach there; therefore, soak that area entirely in water for a whole day. Do this for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation, convey nutrition to the member, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than what the folkers do to restore a fractured limb on another occasion when it is not restored to its beginning, according to how it breaks, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises. If they were right, this would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books and they would have warned of this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen them do so on another occasion, therefore it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol segundo: De fractura quando accides en le cap.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are mote fractures, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of spaza, which compresses all the bone into the cavity, leaving the bone thus as in a wooden stump; through this, this species is named ascial. Or the spaza incides on some part of the bone, and incises the flesh but does not pass the incision to its marrow; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that grates or rubs; its cause is percussion upon the foot or setting on a stool.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, nearing the marrow which it leaves the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of this fracture, it is thickened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair [cable], and for this reason it is named this species of fracture called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made either by setting on a stool or by percussion of the foot, similar to which it causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it is made in the concave location, as happens with clay tiles when they are struck, and is part of their entry into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mainly done in the bodies of wet bones, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so for all these kinds of compound fractures, they are set thus as if by stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come to the remembrance of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these kinds of fractures by detection of them and by inquiry of the pain and appearance of the torn flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary kind is known by this that it is discovered upon the bone, is scraped, and limits upon it with a probe, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and when you see by the symptoms that they signify manifestly through signs of fear, such as vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, and swelling and redness of them, and appearances similar to them in the greater disposals, then you should doubt that it is not healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see uncommon symptoms, you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of the injury and this is in the days of winter, then when you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then when you have cuts to examine the bone before the seventh day, having that what is left of the bone be corrupted by the synovial membrane, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the synovial membrane covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces, then you must incise the fractured part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And when you have examined the thigh of the injured person, and expose the bone according to custom and your method as is possible given the shape of the injury, and make it easy for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter difficulties in detecting the bone, flows of blood or abscesses, then you must pause at this point and do what is appropriate. It is that you fill the area with wrappings infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the injury rest until the abscess is relieved; and be sure of flows of blood; and then proceed with the circuit of the bone and its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the muscle straight through, and this is its form: Then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And administer further with the incisor more lateral than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And ensure that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and should be at the rear end of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not shake and guides it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the muscle is strong and hard, then you must perforate in its circuit before administering the incisors at the travels, which you call shallow travels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are so named thus only because those that stop at the end of the bone near it do not have a terminus at all, for so the travel is round extremity or margin about that which is left the head of it acute resembling a margin or a small circle, which you prohibit from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these travels a great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, within which let the extremity of all be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the travel on the bone and rotate it within those tongs until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then, return the travel to another location, and pause that which passes through all carrying the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the incisor where each traverses of the bone, and make that pus subtle which you can over it at the end of levity, as we have said, while eradicating the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And ensure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And since you have circumscribed the perforated bone, and separated it from the cavity if it is continuous with it, and have extracted that part, ensure that you rasp and smooth that area to match the roughness of the bone itself, resembling a scalpel, but ensure that it be finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you remove any small part of the bones and suture, then take that with ease using what you should use from the instruments; and then cure the wound with liniment and ointment, which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which dissects Gualia and cuts it with great leisure; this is its saying: At the beginning, you must begin to uncover the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and have paused with your hand on the end of this scalpel, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And this is because the lenticular part is lion and you do not cut any cause, and the acute part divides it into two strips lengthwise, as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the chisel along its acute face incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small hammer where you cut through the bone as it is facilitated, and you be sure of the panniculus that no accident occurs in which you fear in any way, and if the medicant were the best leaf of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if any additional cause affects the bone of the panniculus in some locations of the bone, it will cut that part at the end of the incisor lenticular, and deliver that part where it is facilitated, for it is delivered from its place of hurt and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absceded or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine threads, then scrape that roughness away and eliminate those fine threads with thin razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer of them the most convenient parts for your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And ensure that you administer according to your reason, sharpening the blade at its beginning with the rough part of those razors, and then use the fine part of it nearby, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the fine pus from all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	For any other small fractures or fine fractures, ensure that you administer care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not instructed in all those matters.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place this on what we have written about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is cut when you extract the bone, then you should take a cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge that in infused oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in wine and infused oil, and place that over the first cloth, and do this on the pus lightly enough so as not to compress it; then administer ointment to that, and do not press it except by the amount that the wound has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that area for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; then drain it and apply medicines to which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat flour, powder of thyme and of arsenic, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make of these medicines a powder that is sifted over the wound, such as being dry; generally, apply all medicine to which cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And use your substance according to its virtue so that the wound in your cure is clean; do not leave any greasiness or other residue on it; nor allow it to become more virulent. For when it is applied to the bandage of the brain, it corrupts that and spoils it, and you will suffer a great harm from this evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you will suffer in the scrofula of the head, as it is softened by the bone and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and there is darkness on the surface of it; therefore consider if you suffer from this evil the accidents we have said, know that it is dangerous indeed.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness occurs only from the medicine that is applied above, and is caused by that medicine, then take a part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, line them with a cloth, place it over the scab, and apply the remedies of cure as appropriate until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol three.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together above, or one of those few fractures, because in it you have two bones. The part that breaks is cartilaginous and not fractured; thus, do not break it but rub it, and apply warmth and gentle compression.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your other finger, and outside with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your own ease, and make sure that you do not fall due to your operation on the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach there, then you should treat it at the end of the rib where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply this for the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or tenth day, you should rest the swelling with a cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a strip of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two pieces of cloth, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the piece of cloth has such a size that it fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the pieces should be soaked in broth, and changed throughout the day. But I do not see this done; instead, ensure that the cloth is soaked in lard boiled with powder of mill stones; and leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes instead of gout, it is an inflamed nose, with a greater pain wrapped in lion's skin; and you have the fracture of the nose very violent and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another attack of abscess occurs, cauterize it, plaster the nose with cerote or with a hot oil mixture, or with a diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame meal and powder of cinnamon mixed with honey; then place your hand on the patient's nose, and do not cauterize the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nose bones are fractured or comminuted, when you need to cut those areas, extract them with instruments suitable for those cases; then close the incision, and treat that area with what encarnates and consolidates, and with plasters as appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a swelling occurs inside the nose, then cure that with salt and administer lead pipes when they are of pure health.
Capitol .iiii.	 Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	For the restoration of the jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by swelling, consider whether the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts but curved inwardly. In this case, the pain is mild.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger. Push the fat of the fracture inward with ease towards the parts outside, using your other hand from above the bone; do this gently so as to align it properly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment so that they can be properly realigned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter a tooth abscess leading to rupture, then strengthen those of which you fear will burst with wires of gold or silver or catgut; and place a cautery over the broken jaw, place another on the doubled cloth, and one on the large star-shaped stake properly made, or a pin equal in length to the jaw; and above that, as it is convenient for your application, ensuring it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and maintain calmness, and place his food and drink on a lion's skin.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then on the seventh day you should cauterize and remove it; and then correct what has already been altered in him and plaster the area with powder of alum, chalk of oak, or flour of cornmeal, provided that you have applied a cautery to him, and place wool from a lion's skin over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when the plaster is properly applied to him and the bone's position is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until he is healed, strengthening the fracture; for this fracture heals in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said多次出现的脓肿，应在其愈合前在其内进行处理，并妥善治疗该脓肿。
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is open, then consider whether the bone fragment is separated or displaced, then you carefully determine how to treat those displacements in the removal of the fragments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds are wide open, then you enlarge them with the lancet according to the quantity needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have set those displacements, and there will be no need to re-treat them, then you close the wounds if they are wide; otherwise, place over it one of the plasters that suit and cover it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the furcula is fractured, in the anterior part you should consider the muscle, and that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, or separated, or split into two parts rather than naturally occurring such fractures; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens in such fractures, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is such that the fracture is widespread.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is widespread, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken fork, and the other extends the leg at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then adjust the fracture with the nails called entry so that the shape of the bone is restored according to its natural form, neither too prominent nor concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then place a pad or wool cloth under the leg and let its size be according to your need; extend and elevate the fork and press the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the fork towards the outer parts because it is caught in the muscle, then place the leg on its neck, and rest a medium-sized cushion on the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that of the furcula may be elevated as in the presacral area, and then you realign the fracture and equalize it with the ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel the ribs and they are tender, then cut there and remove those fibers with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingenious incise of it with one of the bistourys which you have prepared for this, after placing your hand on the furcula to control the movement; and it is a bony or metallic rod of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it has two ends like you see, and one end is broad while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound disruption which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is large, and there is suspicion of an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you encounter an abscess, then fill a cloth with warm oil and vinegar, and place it over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	For the fracture of a bone when it is your wound and section, you pause to apply an ointment made from flour of new wheat, and place it over leon stopa, and then place a wick from that, if you need it, and then take a long piece of cotton that is about one palm wide; and place powders double the size on top of the stopa and the ointment; and then take a thin candle stick whose width is three fingers and similar in length; and then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap the cloth around the candle stick over the area of the fracture; and then pause to apply wax thus melted, and roll it over the neck of the candle and leave its tip exposed, and leave the bad part covered, and reduce that over all parts, and when times that the fracture is set properly, and this is what you cannot hide from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, provided that the splint is not loosened over the broken bone; so that you may examine the wound every day, when the flesh has softened or see the splint already become loose, then you adjust this and strengthen the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on a pillow, and under their neck, use a small cushion to support them; so that the assistant raises the support of the affected side, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or attach the arm to the side of the affected area.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless an abscess occurs in that place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that it is adhering to the wound, and adjust the bandage to fit properly and restore the area, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforts according to the most within twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the middle of the place and not across it but along the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so, when the place is broken—and it is broken in the middle of the place—and cannot be known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the area and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of skill that is within your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the area powder of ground white ash and stopped lion's gall; and then place powdered double-dried drapet; and then place on the table a thin slice according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or somewhat more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if you leave the slice concave in some part of the spoon's location, then level that concavity with stopped lion's gall, and then place the slice according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with human fat a long strip of cloth and place the slice firmly in such a way that it is not displaced from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the pulse on each day; and all days that it is softened, apply another application and strengthen the stake if it has been displaced from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And apply the patient's back over their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the pulse, and that you know securely which it is of the bones where the pain began nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the bone pain and place a chain there, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula with caution if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location and remains unhealed; more often, the ends become necrosed and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And concerning the accidents when his spleen is broken it declines internally and occurs with great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fainting, and bleeding; this is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that the patient be supine on his back, and place a cushion between the shoulders of the patient; then press on the muscles of the patient, adjust the spine of the patient against the ribs, and perform the operation with subtlety according to every manner that is possible and convenient, so that the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place something soft like plaster and cotton wool under a thin wooden board or one similar in lightness, ensuring you wrap this in cloth; then perform the operation with subtlety over the broken bone so it is not too tight; apply bandages several times around the back, securing them firmly but decently; always consider the bandaging at all times, strengthening it when it becomes softened.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity prompts you to perform incision or puncture, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and correct what occurs by this method of cure; then return the plaster, if needed for this face; and adjust the dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join together; and from the ends of their parts in front, no such contact occurs unless by those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, as the inquiry into it is made with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the internal divisions, then it happens that severe pain occurs and puncture occurs, just as in one who has pleurisy, and for this reason he puts on a veil; and it happens to him difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ribs are ingeniously arranged in that manner overlapping each other.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them they say: place the patient on a soft bed that causes inflation and distension, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and the fracture is pushed towards the external divisions.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	More importantly, we must consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle, but if it occurs, then help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the abdomen and near where it sucs with strength; and this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the abdomen will draw the superfluities to that place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them would say: cover the area with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, so that the dressing equals when you wrap it according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a diet and medical cure.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the pain is intense and unbearable, causing the patient to suffer, and the bone punctures do not alleviate it, we fear for the patient, then we should cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place our hand over that instrument which preserves the memory of the procedure, and carefully cut the bone, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we suture the two edges of the wound, if it is large, we treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in rosin oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be placed on his side on the mattress on which he sleeps, until he is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	For the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases where there are fractures in the bones of the neck, and then apply traction and similar treatments to the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot recover, extend, or strengthen. When you stretch them with ropes or prick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you can conclude that they are not recovering, and in such cases, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you prick those areas and feel pain when stretched with ropes or pricked with a needle, then you can conclude that the fracture of the bone is healing and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck appearing to him and want to know if he is healthy or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you see that they are already softened, consider what happens in the more severe cases, and when it is near to his side, he will become weak and have a desire to defecate and urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and then do not trouble yourself with the cure of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no such cause occurs, the condition is better and more轻微的。
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for him is that you should cauterize to induce sedation at the site where you pause over the transverse or rubbed vertebra, or with pieces of hot wood; place your hand there for some days until the apostema is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and apply a paste over that area; command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to lie on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if by chance you find the tendon of the bone detached or some cause that has separated from it, then you must cauterize over the joint and keep that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, sew if it is large; then care for that with some red ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the head of the bone, then you must introduce the base of your left hand into the buttock, and align the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible by second degree equilibrium; then place a poultice and dressing over it, if you need those, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel the tendons broken in it, then you must operate on that, and set it, and care for the wound with the treatment that is applied until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and are split lengthwise; and pain occurs in the area and there is puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the limb is that you place your hand over that area which is at the fracture where its figure is.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you adjust it according to what appears appropriate by equalizing it so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the middle or is already declining towards the parts below, then you place the patient on his side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have adjusted it, apply a poultice over it, and then place the wooden or copper splint over it, and secure it tightly so that you do not fear puncturing the fracture or removing the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And adjust the indentation so that it fills the area where the splint will be secured, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess develops during the extension and restoration, then you stop the extension and restoration until the abscess is drained. Place something over it to drain it as previously instructed; then return to the restoration and secure it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if accidents occur in the joints or are comminuted, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the adjutori.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the codetta at the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a rod of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And place two pins at the ends, and then suspend it from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on a bench; and then throw his broken arm over the rod until it reaches the middle point where the curvature of the rod is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And let it be suspended over something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient be supine on his back and suspend his head by the neck with a cord; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest of him; and each extend to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the hold on the fracture with one cord and another around it, and each of the two ministers extend to their sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then hold the middle of the cord over the tendon and the other end of the fracture apply with your hand.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the hand, then hold the cord at that location and over that hand.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it when it is equalized according to what is needed by good application.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess forms on the seventh day, then leave the incision open, place a woolen pad soaked in vinegar and olive oil under it, and wait until the abscess drains, then secure it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The manner of securing it is to place a poultice over the fracture, then wrap a cloth around the poultice; next adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then wrap the cloth around the support for the arm so that the arm is in place, unless some cause of the broken bone prevents this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use stays.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Then place that stay over the fracture which is both wider and stronger than the other stays; place the distance between each stay equal to the width of a finger, and the length of the stays according to the break, adding three fingers' breadth to every part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then secure the stays at the incision which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your compression on the site of the fracture should be more firm.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the compression should be lesser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you place the stones in their position and apply the compression as we have said when you restore the member to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, cauterize, then you leave the compression and stones for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs at the site of application; or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive compression; and then adjust all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's knees be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place yourself over the auxiliary cushion filled with wool equally, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not blurred nor dissolved, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the food of the patient according to the order we have mentioned, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually strengthens; then observe as the food thickens.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days after the auxiliary and belt are applied, they should be strengthened for ten days; then observe as they are loosened and a bath is given, along with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is still irritated, then do not loosen the bandage and the stays for four days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; the former is small, and it is that which forms the little finger side of the elbow, while the latter is larger and is placed outside the small one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the large or small firestick is broken forcefully, and you must tear it apart forcefully.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small firestick is broken above, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing of it is even lighter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the firestick is broken, if the fracture is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when two long bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small firestick above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration, which should be done with a slight extension and facilitated by keeping it aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large firestick is what is broken, then you must perform a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both firesticks are broken together, then you must perform the extension more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand in such a way that it facilitates the restoration and extension of the firestick, keeping it extended over a cushion, and position the wrist above the parts above, more so than all others. The auricular finger should be below the other fingers, and the patient's thigh should be placed on a sloping board.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at their head or side, so that the patient does not further strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a pillow, while another minister extends it over similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor aligns the bone at the site where it dislocated according to the best possible alignment that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are disruptions in the bone at the fracture site, then you must forcefully reduce the entire piece into its place with your virtue (skill or expertise).
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separated disruption that prevents the restoration of the limb, then you must operate on it and set it according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is open, I have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with charcoal made from rubbed olive oil and white wax, making it halfway between thick and thin, and tightly cover the area with a fine thread to allow the abscess to drain; then remove the charcoal and apply a plaster prepared with powder of madder in honey, and place a bandage over it; and ensure that the stellate bandage is placed over and around that fracture firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you shall know that the number of the bones in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one joint or in two joints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression firmly and vigorously over the location of the fracture. When the compression is more intense on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts, place the compression a little more moist according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened with moisture, and should not be hard or rough. The fat of the lamb which is strengthened should be a mixture of fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as was previously mentioned for what happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that occurrence ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction is already softened and the bone has been restored and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment reaches there, and strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then it should not slip away in about twenty days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the patient's hand by its virtue of movement, and let it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or more thoroughly restored in twenty-eight days, and all this depends on the complexity of the injuries and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers tender there is a fracture, and do not hurt them but rub them gently.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or sprain occurs to the hand, you should make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for about one hundred equal parts of a day, and then place your hand over the extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor must join them with good reduction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cauterization; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the tear is in the inner parts, you should make a pocket of cloth in the palm, and command the patient to hold that tightly with their torn palm; then hold it tight with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the cloth cover be of cloth on which is placed something to lift it, so that the flesh is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another strip of cloth above the bone and another on the part, in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if turning your hand at the wrist among the fingers with wheat.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you happen to break one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip to the right so that the fracture is elevated and not aggravated.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where the bone is; or bind all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above that bone, as we have said for the base of the finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the placement of cautery and opposition — in relation to your operation — according to what you see when any cause from those arises, as per the repeated narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitol XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the os coxae.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The os coxae is fractured and the pain is declared according to where it is converted to in front and on top.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on his belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the ligament to its proper place according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the rim of the coxal bone, then extend the ligament to the side of the ilium, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the ilium, then make the ligament extend to the side of the ilium, and the extension to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing together his hands as you reduce it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then cover with a plaster and bandage, so as not to infect the limb with an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for some days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long piece of linen between the thigh and the leg near the knee at the splits, allowing the ends of the linen to extend well beyond both parts, then wrap this around the leg and thigh with any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place something on the thigh over the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong constriction around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps. The closer you are to the site of the fracture, the tighter, lighter, and firmer your wrap should be.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts you placed between which it should reach the foot cavity, and strengthen both ends of the stakes on the other side so that the bandage does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then keep the constriction over it so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation in the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, you should treat it with the appropriate remedy, and adjust what has occurred as soon as possible according to what we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so, if in the bone there is a worse condition that requires it, then you must equalize that as much as possible; otherwise, treat it and keep the area immobilized until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to its ligaments, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But more importantly in the restoration done in such a manner no harm is done to the patient's mobility; and if it is restored alone, or another side is applied to the other, then it is necessary that the one from which it was taken remain immobile.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the hip is strengthened in about ten days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs more frequently, but it often takes several weeks to heal completely.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or a tear in its parts, and this can be single or multiple, and over that, everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized as much as broken parts are placed between the fingers and according to what is possible by equilibrium, conjunction, and fabrication for ease and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need it; strengthen it above at the core towards what is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for an abscess, cauterize and apply a dressing to those areas opposed to any accident according to what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the ilium there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the ilium; the other is thin and is named pubis.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of the species of fracture occur in the same way as they do for the two bones of the arm, and thus the restoration is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones together, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint is dislocated in front directions.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find that mark, which is one of those causes not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	More importantly, if the joint dislocation has marks or bruises, let the extension be less and more gentle, and this will alleviate your treatment's severity.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, when you equate the tendons and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pestles of wood which are placed under the causes that are stopped by sutures, and make them from palm branches; discard those with small knots, and not with rough surfaces, and let their length be according to the length of the joint and the depth between them.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be down below the base location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two shoes on three points of both extremities and in the middle point, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and this is for good stability.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in it so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, and when there is swelling properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg on each day and study it carefully, and keep it free from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever any cause of these occurs, then immediately treat it to prevent further complications.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and if they do not occur to them, I rub them on the appropriate parts.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as shown.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and wrap it around, and place the patient's foot on a small table with two holes.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tightly wrap the foot with bandages and other materials as needed, ensuring it is well secured.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have instructed you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger in position according to its length, and slightly above it; and place the skin on this table which you have prepared, and tie it securely in place.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place each broken finger slightly above its quantity enveloped in a linen cloth, and secure the table under the base of the foot, and standing over one of the ends of the table, make a incision in the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and apply this to any similar case.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the shin bone and the groin of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, place that part in a crooked position, and then slightly incline it towards the side of the hipbone, and keep it supported behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is done in the thigh as hoped; and then the woman is stimulated, and her leg is lifted little by little, for all this must be done between when it reaches the side of the thigh as hoped and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; and then she urinates, return it according to the manner in which you prepared it at the beginning, and then return it to its original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or so, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and tighten it over the wound; then insert a catheter of reed into the wound; and place all the bladder within the wound's cavity, and blow through the catheter with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it is filled with pus and stays for a few days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major dispositional lines of rightful restoration and constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the thigh bone of a man when broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place over it an envelopment of cloth, and be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to treat those who suffer from displaced fractures, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the femur, or similar. You should set and bleed them frequently, provided that the conditions for bleeding are met as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement exudes pus, then you should set it with retention, trying to sprinkle it with saffron powder, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	More so if an abscess forms, then you should allow the restoration to continue for nine days until the abscess is resolved, and do not approach it on the seventh and tenth day, for then you will cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is broken and prominent over the knee joint, then you must carefully reduce it and align it with your hands with as little effort and extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not at your readiness and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you must reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; for this reason, the doctor must take three or four of these according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends at its extremities; and the bottom should be of greater thickness tending outward, and the middle part should be thinner.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the limb be elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Lift it up in one go so that the bone returns and is aligned with some reference point.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is fine and does not take hold with the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise that part using the instruments we mentioned; it must be done in such a way that it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape clean the bone of roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after reduction, if the patient experiences severe pain in the area, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have been taught to give the patient great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar tightly wrung out, and properly during summer, and do not pause over the wounded area to apply salve or any other cause involving oil, so that no infection or corruption occurs.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it improves with fomentations and use coverings according to the amount of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for as many times doctors have done this, and caused it to happen to their patients, either death or severe illness. It is a matter of health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the moon is in a weak, moist phase, different from the phase of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain evil accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not pause over applying steams, but rather use cloth bandages instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the plague begins to form a scab on it, then you lift up the cloth that you had placed over that area, and then administer calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat plagues, thus applying tetra-pharmcon and similar substances to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should untie the bandage and examine the plague at midday and evening in each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that suppuration flows from it to the parts you leave facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the scab been removed from it, then you should know that here are situated the small bones, so examine the plague by probing it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those situated, those that are separate remain and are extracted, those from which they are not separated and cause pain in the member, forcibly you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plague turns yellow or green, it is stomachic or another species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from where the main discussion lies, you should make your presence known: when the joint is torn, you should stand over the limb thus like the joints of the thigh and the helper, and seem like those of the large limbs, and do not fear the tearing or extraction of it, for many spots appearing by this cause lead to death; having left that within which can perish, for strong wind will fall by itself in about 20 days or so; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and otherwise leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of a swelling that occurs in the region of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Spots appearing cause this swelling in the region of the healing of a fracture, and especially near the joints, and alter the shape of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, honey, mirabilitum, acrasia, and seem like those; try which of them you take from it some or all, confirm those with vinegar or white of egg, or with wine, and place that over the swelling in wool, and constrain those on it by good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the tension that you have placed there not loosened for many days; then loosen it and put another in its place, during which time the knot should be remedied; or strengthen above that lead strip downward, as lead has the property of remediating all that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot has already become fixed in the foot and is tightened, and necessity demands to loosen it, then split it along its upper part, and incise the superfluous and protruding part, or relax it with a hot iron during which time it should be remedied; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of a fracture when restored and then, approximately, the limb's subtle structure or vein does not follow its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the subtle structure or vein of the limb does not follow its natural course: this is done for several reasons. One reason is the excessive solution of the ligament and the joining of it not being done according to necessity; or due to an excess of tension in the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excessive application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to a lack of strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the body of the patient tender while the fever multiplies within; give him baths; and insert sweet and pleasant things into him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the wet compress with white wine, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously, prohibit the operation that causes them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member, already reduced near its healing from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and joint, occurs in the form of the member's deformation, yet nonetheless the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not receive the word of one who thinks that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are many foolish doctors and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then immerse them in a mixture of goat's milk in which you have placed soft herbs, such as helichrysum and licorice, and melilot, similar to those; then apply a poultice with a well-made demulcent plaster; or prepare mucilage of licorice root and mix it with wheat straw ash or olive oil, and apply it as a plaster; or use fatty figs wrapped in pigeon feathers, resembling those mentioned in the medications called armernian consolidations.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by gentle friction applied to the more humid parts, and movement of the limb should be maintained at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already been present and becomes strong, forming a stone and requiring treatment, then it is necessary to excise the pus above the cecum and dissolve and incise the continuation of the bone. What is superfluous from the nodulation of that method should be removed from the bone using fine incisors, and facilitation should be administered in that area with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an impairment of one of the joints of that location, such that it is forbidden movement, and alters the figure of the limb, causing great pains and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to act quickly to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area can become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be cut or stretched during the time of gangrene, for moisture and heat cause spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More importantly, when this occurs, you should prepare for the incision of the foot to drain the gangrene, and allow it to rest until the gangrene subsides; then, the limb should be soaked in warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member be treated with that water of which the memory will bring back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from above the part of the body downward, then leave.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their place with little movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, after which they should be softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and so that they cannot have it nor close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient should be wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and thorough, it must be reduced gently, and should not be delayed entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert one of his hands behind the dislocated jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are outside and equal; and command the patient to cease moving his jaws and bring them back to their place; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its proper location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are significantly dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powder pellets of cloth soaked in cerot, made of wax and rubbed with oil; and quickly apply a softening lotion with many lint pieces.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to spit for any reason; having their food ready at hand, until when the pains subside and the jaws are loosened, then turn what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered easily, and when dealing with the opening of the mouth, do not work against the patient's comfort; allow them to eat, drink, and speak, until the jaw is loosened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then blisters often occur, causing persistent fever and soreness. And strongly swelling of the abdomen of the patient, along with severe vomiting of pure bile, often follows.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is serious; and blisters often occur to those upon whom this happens within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the stern inside by its continuation to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And place your hand over the area with strong pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand over the area with ointment and powder, strengthening it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More often, the extremity of that which is connected to the bone is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and set as we have said and as is within your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over the area with ointment, powder, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this therapeutic procedure, the end of the muscle is returned to its proper place when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol.xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any manner, but according to three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called tarte; and it is not dislocated from the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated from the parts in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most dislocated and protrudes outward at the parts below the tendon, especially where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those with many muscles, it protrudes outward with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes such people are struck by a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected area becomes emphysematous due to an abscess, and is ruptured because it was already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover what you have sprayed onto him, especially over him, and proceed with the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, you must use titillation; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the adjacent muscle, for which you find a manifest difference. You find a concavity at the head of the muscle, and by using titillation, you should feel the movement of the head of the muscle like a hen's foot, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor elevate it through any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must examine the foot or ankle, and then you will find a clear touch, which is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the joint; then place your fingers under it and use titillation to raise the joint with strength at its location, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it there; then place your fingers so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if, for what we have said, it does not return, and the dislocation began some days ago, then you should bathe the patient in cold water and apply a wet dressing that will soften and lubricate, as if using roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administer it.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then place the patient's foot on its sole and position it with the woolen cloth equal between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand over the heel, elevating the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the patient's foot so that it is not injured at the joints, and another attends to the head of the muscle, ensuring it is not injured at the joints, for then it quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and make a person present who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of that thigh, inserting his muscle under the cloth of the patient's foot and elevating the cloth above the joints while the patient's foot is suspended in air, and another attends to pulling the patient's foot from the joints of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then find something that another person can suspend from, so as to keep the serious part, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long pole whose end is round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and placed under the patient; then cover its head with lion skins, and let the patient lie according to the length of the pole. Then extend your hand to the opposite parts of the body; and extend the other part of the body with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this remedy: and you should take a pole whose length is that of two braces, and its width be four fingers, and its thickness be enlarged at the base according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place lion skins over the round head so that the pole does not injure the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head, and extend your hand or arm into the parts, and tie the limb to the supporter and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended to the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon become stable.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument on the patient is completed in any way that is possible, then place a wick of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdenum and albumen of egg over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed above, and firmly tie the wick to the patient; the plaster should be thoroughly covered with the wick, and the hand of the patient should be attached to his neck, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is comforted, for it is easier for the limb to heal.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then give more food about seven or five times; and exercise a movement; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to frequent humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery in three burns, as previously said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the poultice and stricture are reduced over it several times, but still not healed and catgut is not able to elevate that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle at the head of the muscle are either incised or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of what is caused, you should reduce the foot and the calf or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other constriction, and care that within it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a delay in the healing and tardiness in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden to you—whether you see it quickly or feel it upon examination depending on the form in which it is dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated shoulder joint into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And note that when it comes to the collarbone, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it forms an abscess. For if it forms an abscess, reducing it becomes difficult, and even with great effort, it may not be completely cured; especially behind, for this is the worst of all types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death if not treated promptly.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is what can be reduced, is that his hand be extended between two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on his knees and let him, and push the joint with the heels of his own hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And have two ministers stretch out their arms, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not resisted.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or a bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion in which there is infiltration and evacuation of white humor, and be externally secured with a belt, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then release it; and if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is secured; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	May be if accidents happen to it gravitate after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer wet dressing and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply that to it, and put it in a bath; and when it is soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over it for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion, once, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.  
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place yourself over that wet and cracked fissure on the side and strongly press upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and reduce it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it requires speed in the reduction at the hour when it was dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The physician then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	More importantly, it should be considered whether the palm is already near the chest of the hand. In that case, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred previously, place the back of both hands on the table so that the position of the hand of the patient is precisely over the table, ensuring that the physician's hand falls over the vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen that by applying an ointment yielding to the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, you cannot bear nor perform anything more regarding its reduction.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Moreover, according to the tortuosity of the joint; and not noting any cause in the patient, but that your hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and there is no hope in it so you apply a cautery near the site of the injury and strengthen it with this to confer some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the gout has returned, then place it over the ointment which we have applied, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; and then gradually loosen it and leave it, and exercise his hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement in it has been restricted and any gravity occurs, then apply that with cold water and some friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the palm itself, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers, so that it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it so that it can be properly aligned on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to that procedure, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And simulate this if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and bind that part to that location and perform your first operation on it until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And when it is dislocated in other parts, do so similarly.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the lower back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their proper positions, then there is no cure for that part, as death may ensue.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion involuntarily passes out, and they cannot retain it; often several times, the muscles of the patient's body, or their legs, or their arms, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its proper place, as multiple times a vertebra is displaced and multiple times the removal of those is done in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that vertebra is displaced to the back parts and is named gelbozitat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	More importantly, the treatment of this is that when you consider if the gelbozitat is due to puberty, as in this case there is neither cure nor complete recovery.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Moreover, in those that come by contact or percussion or semblance to those, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure at length, of which the more returns to being prophetic; but I, having already abbreviated from that of which there is little excuse for too much, through my proximity to your understanding, expose and explain this in various instruments of that by which I will show and expand upon it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in a gout that occurs from the front part of the foot, it neither becomes painful nor heals; similarly, in one that occurs between two toes.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs precisely between the toes is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And let the patient lie extended on his side close to the wall, and place something wet under him to prevent the foot from being bitten.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, set in the ground at the end of the patient's side near his head, and another stick across the patient's feet at the other end of the stick.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister hold the rod, and do not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the patient's head and let the titillic ligaments form a firm seal; extend the end of the ligament to the rod which goes over the head, and tie that there; and then strengthen the other ligament on the patient's hips with its ends, extending those to the legs; and then adjust all the ligaments and tie those to the other rod which goes over the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister extend the ligament to the part of the rod, and do not move both rods and ligaments in their places where they are inserted, but do not fix them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor place his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or place him over a table, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if he does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and cut into the wall where we said it is near the patient a place at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and the doctor places his hands near the spine, tightly holding it so that it is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, hold the joint which is swollen in your hand; and when you stand, place the patient's head at the end of the palm of one stick, the length of which is as long as a man's arm, and place the other end of the stick behind the palm of another stick in the same manner; let the distance between each stick be about one palm's width, and now make sure that each stick is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not wobble.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let it be a round stick on which the joint is placed, and let it be rotated between the two sticks of the stakes.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a stick on which the round stick is fastened, the length of which is one palm's width for what is rotated; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched on the foot of the patient in the thigh which you should place the head of it, and the ligaments that you have stretched on the thighs of the patient in the groin which you should place the feet of him.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each groin and have a minister twist the groin with his hand, and the doctor align the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the way of the groin:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spine is returned and the area is aligned, then cover it with a poultice of honey wax, and some wool; place it over the poultice using a strip of tablecloth whose width should be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length should fit the area of the yellowish discharge, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the ligament as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment under which it should heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any danger persists in the area at the end of the healing, then you should administer medicines that soothe and relieve through continuous use as we have recommended; and already a lead plate is administered in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes an imminent accident occurs at the base of the vertebrae of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; it is that bone which you already suspect so as not to give rise to suspicion to him regarding this medicine, for it will greatly affect your accident causing death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocated to such an extent, and not occur as what happens with other joints due to slight movement and凹陷。
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or forwards, or backwards.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated towards the inside, and little towards the front or the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inside is that when you adjust the healthy leg to the injured one, the injured leg appears longer and the sole is more prominent than the healthy side. The injured foot cannot bend; it must be reduced gently. This is the area where a chorde should be applied with a cautery, so that the head of the hernia is already secured here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of one who suffers from dislocation is on the outward parts, for the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of one who suffers from dislocation in the front parts is that the groin swells according to the injury, but does not bend. The pain is located in the depth. If it is forced to go further and cannot reach the front parts; the urine of the patient is retained, and the swelling is suppurative. You should treat the patient with a hot application.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of one who suffers from dislocation in the rear parts is that it does not swell in the depth, nor can it bend what should bend, and the groin on that side is shorter than the other, and the swelling is soft, and the base of the thigh should be placed at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old or ancient, whether it has already become fixed. If so, then after closely examining its position, you administer a reduction according to its disposition; but this is not part of the entire treatment. Then, one should not assume anything further in that regard.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four species of dislocation, then take hold of it so that you can restore the joint and extend it to the internal parts and the external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left, for it usually returns by force and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong counterforce and extend the leg on that side or its chest, or apply liniment which is rubbed over the leg above the ankle; and another minister extend his hand from this attempt to place his hands on the patient's wrists; and strongly apply liniment lion over the sole of the foot, and have another minister hold the end of the liniment.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And extend the limb from the angle to the part of the shoulder blade, or from the back part to the part of the hip.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And extend all these at once so that the patient is elevated on their own body and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be well; but otherwise, for every species, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is inside, make sure that the patient's foot is returned to its natural position; then place the ligaments on the base of the thigh in that area which is between the head of the femur and where the sling will be placed; and extend the ligaments above the part of the groin to the upper part of the scapula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly takes the ankles, and compresses the large part of the thigh, extending the parts externally by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the gentlest treatment for which this limb is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you excuse yourself and do not follow the treatment for this species of treatment at all, then make sure that both feet of the patient are ligated together with strong ligaments, placed over both the tibias and both the fibulas.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be by the quantity of four digits, and let the bad leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the bad leg is suspended over the head of the bed, and it should be in the hand; let the length of it from the ground be by the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to hold the thigh, and let him suspend the bad leg with another youth, and the other youth holding the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when dislocation is at the part outside, make the bad leg touch the thigh according to what we have recommended in having the patient lie on his side; and strengthen the ligament over the bad leg's thigh and over its ankle.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two beds, one under his foot, and the other under his head; and adjust the beds over the thigh on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the bad leg is not injured by the bed being between his thighs, for you need to allow the extension from the sides to proceed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey the reverse, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand there diligently as we said in regard to equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May he lie on his side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then lie the leg extended slightly, and this is according to this method of narration about the shoulder; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the shoulder blade of the patient, and closely draws the other hand toward him, and with that draw he places the extended limb at the side away from the side of the back.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then the patient should not lie with the limb extended at the side away from him, but elevated above the ground; and he should be placed on a hard surface, just as we have described when the width of the shoulder was dislocated outward, according to what we said about his lying on two widths; and he should lie face down with his hands extended, as we have already stated.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And ensure that a compress is applied on the area where the joint hurts.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, for you have extended the patient's legs, and when you see those equal positions and the patient expands their leg with its usual relaxation, then you know that the limb according to need has been returned — then you adjust the thighs and apply bandage so that the width is not altered in any of the parts; and you adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those equal positions in the examination, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then you let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for swelling, then you return and apply a plaster to that area, and adjust it according to your initial structure, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, allowing it to rest in walking for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol. XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and more to the front than to the back; it is not dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his hand to his hip; if the shoulder is dislocated, you will know it.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you place the patient correctly, encourage him to extend his hand, if possible; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make your hands adhere to the shoulder, keeping those between his fingers on the shoulder with strength, while another minister extends his foot so that the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of relief is that their waist adheres to the thigh lightly without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply this and make the waist adhere to the thigh, and keep it with a bandage for three or four days, and remove it later.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the bad leg for行走，请继续你的翻译。看来你输入的是中文，而不是英文。如果你是想继续翻译这段文字，可以直接说“E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.”的翻译是：“And do not use the bad leg for行走，请继续你的翻译。”请告诉我如何继续。
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	And if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension to the limbs as described in the previous narration regarding the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol. xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the opposite direction, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of the dislocation is that you see the tendon swollen coming from the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure for the removal of it is a light reduction, and it is that the tendons be extended with ease and be equalized as they return.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the cure when it is dislocated by force, make sure to straighten the limb, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the patient at the affected location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then place your right hand on the foot of the upper part, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the cleft.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot with your right hand, and with your left hand twice, then extend your left hand; and push the foot with your right hand while holding the leg steady.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the foot towards the leg for the third time, and you will be at the cleft.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if it returns in one or two movements according to this manner, and you close the foot well, that is good; but if not, then you must repeat the operation, for it did not return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of it as we have advised is prohibited to you, then lay the patient on his back on the ground, and place a hard pillow under him, and between his thighs, and you have already covered him with a cloth so that the hernia does not descend.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And let one minister hold his thighs, and another minister extend the foot by holding its ankles or the cloth tied around the calf; and each minister extend themselves against the extension of their part, and the pillow be placed between the thighs of the patient, retaining it there, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts where you must maintain its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And let the doctor equalize the dislocation by holding the ankles, and another minister hold the healthy thigh, so that the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when you have returned the dislocation and declared to you the health of the reduction thereof, then place a plaster strongly over it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And keep in mind that you should beware or protect the nerves which are behind the talus, lest the lint be too strong and harm those nerves severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint is moistened, bind it firmly.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	More if it is necessary to go before that space, be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs at this point, then be sure to administer what we have described in the preceding narrative for treatment and fomentation in another location until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Gently extend the one that is dislocated as little as necessary; what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in several toe joints of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a level surface such as the ground or a table, and keep it thus as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should position your foot, and place your own foot over the area where the joints are located. Gently push that part with your foot to encourage it to return to its proper position, and observe that it is extended and does not appear as a prominence in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the patient's foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which has two ends. Gently strengthen it with a firm and adequate structure for three days; then release it and allow it to rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that occur from a fall or a fracture or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the cure of that and its restoration, mistakes may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it, but only one who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious, patient, neither hot-tempered nor presumptuous; and one who uses at the beginning medicines that cause suppuration solely, leaving the disease to divine judgment, rather than to those to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of suffering, in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before suppuration occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we want, proceed to administer a regimen that causes suppuration and heals the wound according to what suits it with the drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the separated bones, then you must treat them as we said for simple illnesses in what preceded in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you, you should give it to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true self those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God bless him.
Amen.	Amen.
