Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have labored long, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is a part of my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation of surgery is established in our region and in our times as entirely private, despite the importance of the science of it and the evident traces of it; and there have been no substantial descriptions of it except in some small accounts in the works of the Ancients, which corrected many errors and hesitations, but have closed the understanding of it and lengthened its practice.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is evident to me that I should vivify that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for the forms of the surgical instruments such as cautery tools and other implements of the work to be added through the declaration and preparation, which are necessary causes.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More than that, the reason why a good craftsman does not place his hand well in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and that his actor before this must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Gualia knew, entering that he was acquainted with the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the tendons, and the number of them, and their integrity; and of the arteries and veins, active and quiet, and of the places of the contraction of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this, Hippocrates says that in the small work, but more so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More than that, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy will easily fall into error, which can lead to the deaths of many people, as I have seen too many such cases. For some are formed in this science but fall back into the errors of those sciences and experiences.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a doctor who fell ill and inflicted an ap斯塔西奥病于一个妇女的颈部，因误切了一些颈动脉，致使妇女流血过多而死。
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who almost removed a stone from a man who had been in his state for a long time, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he extracted that stone using a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the stone to be extracted, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he will likely die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the patient's thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then let it rest for a few days, and command us to release the ligament; and thus remain until the thigh and foot are well healed, and proceed to recovery.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to release the ligament, and tranquility and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not restrain that, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member during the illness.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the evil increased greatly in him and in his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain is purely of melancholic humor, and does not affect everything entirely, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two deviations: one where the operation is associated with health, and one where the work is perilous in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed here in all this chapter where the operation is filled with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with joy and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to heal, and oppose your weapons to what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you do not falter: for more remains to your glory, and greater still in the world and beyond in your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already dissected in some surgical cases:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness wrongly, so that bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already dedicated this treatise according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the treatise, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered in the foot, regarding the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on suction cups, and on plaigs, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of tortoises and similar; chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, he begins the treatment of the entire work.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Know the quality of those coals for the cautery and the harms from them, and in what condition the cautery should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its harm is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For my part, I content myself with a little from their sermons, to avoid excessive length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus say that cautery benefits all complexions universally which is of or has matter, except two complexes, which are complexes of seminal matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex of gout and dry matter, it becomes desiccated; for some said that cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such an illness, which is gout and dry, be healed by what is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say to those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all gout and dry illness that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of a man to its humors in relation to the complex of fire, you find the body hot.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to his speech, for I have already experienced this several times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not claim to have experienced this as one who has been extensively trained in the Capitol of Cautery through recent exercise, and who knows the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their manifestations, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, and the span of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no need for fear, and especially in wet and inflammatory diseases, since all doctors are agreed on those, and do not differ regarding the use of cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Understand, children, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lie in the burning medical instrument, for the fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and causing no significant harm to other members it touches.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Yet the action of the burning medical instrument reaches to those members which it touches, and strongly makes come into the affected member a disease that is difficult to cure and quickly afflicts it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Yet fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but cause superfluous heat. We are already well aware of this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written at liberty in this pause, and to reveal your secret about fire, its quality of operation on bodies, and its expulsion, which you use to expel diseases, I would deliver a philosophical demonstration, which would be useful for your people.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to perform cautery and when is the best season of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage due to accidental weather changes is submerged in the youth of what is affected by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong wounds, and fissures, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those caused by malice are greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus do not trust in these, sons, for they esteem only the common people and the foolish doctors, since they say that the illness that is cured by cautery is not constant at all times, and they withhold this knowledge.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus because they consider it so, for cautery is not but a method in medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors, which are the cause of venous pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But still, excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the nature of the illness, its location, and its virtue, as well as what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what is received by it in its acquisition through food and likenesses of those causes; but if the illness where cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, like cautery for toothache due to pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain does not return, but this is done in small quantities.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the language of surgeons, not what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that helps either medicine or any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is the opposite of this; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, which helps in that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is a cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand of the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for a cautery does not hurt much, since it is not absolutely severed, for I have applied it and tested it, and found that it does not do so in all bodies as in others, and a gold cautery is good and better than iron thus they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the reactivity of the gold, and it prepares to receive flame; and if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and cases in the fire some sheets so that the artisan can cut by the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, you should apply the iron cautery more lightly and more precisely to the correct position of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot in the caput, so that I delay the request of the patient what he wants from me.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servery accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and many traumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the neck and the ears flowing, and many sleepiness, and tooth pain, and the gullet, and universally all illness that comes through coldness, such as paralytically, soda, and apoplexy, and similar symptoms in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a medicinal laxative for the head, for three or four nights, according to the power of the illness and the age of the patient and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to place his head on a pillow, and place that cushion between your hands on a sloping bench so that he rests his hands on his own foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the edge of your palm near his mouth on the razor between his heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But more importantly, since the right place has been found, mark that place with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place the heated cautery over the marked spot with a needle, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually pressed firmly, while you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and examine the spot, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed through the skin, lift your hand as much as the amount of flesh has been burned away. If not, return your hand to that iron or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little of salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place yourself over the inflamed wound and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with ointment of tetrafarmacum until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, for it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the joint should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the bone's surface is charred.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is burnt from the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing forcefully into the bone until it chars, and this is the method of Alphcatai.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and soon it will be cured once it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery for all, only in some men according to the way of fear; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is; whereas the head is developed by solution of continuity of the head as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and perform that work for health.
Capitol segon.	Capitalize second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head, and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses bandages, pillows, head purges, plasters, poultices, leeches, gloves, and other remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not improve him from any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold or does not have great inflammation, then that cautery should be replaced by another.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and uncover the quantity which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this way, but do not uncover the skull, for the patient experiences great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will say this about the cauterization in its place, for I know that the cauterization of the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that which cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Top of the head.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cauterization for new migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain at the back of the head or a dull pain inside the skull, the head should be treated with medicinal powders to purge it, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, cauterization in these two ways may be applied: either with a burning acute medicine, or with a iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a piece of aloes, incinerate it, and abridge the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then place the location of the pain on the temple with a lancet laid gently there, and let the needle be hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then strengthen above the place stopped by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the aloes, and let the wound remain for two or three days, and then place your hand under it submerged between the borders until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that wound by anointing it until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do what some burning medicines allow, which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed according to this manner: ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a knuckle, because the head of it has the form of a small crystal and in the middle part there is a slight prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the locus of the pain, and retract it—so that the artery left is not burned—and rotate the small iron gradually with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is burned due to the severity of the burn is considerable, lift your hand so that the artery left is not burned, so that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak it in salt water and place it over the locus, and leave it for three days; then place it near a warm spot, and cover it with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the knife blade according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this not-so-old migraine.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery treatment for ancient headache.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a headache as we have said of the previous cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not improve the patient, and sometimes due to the disease being too severe for what we have said about the first cautery or the cautery with fire, then you should heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place your line on the site of pain along its length, or any part of it; then hold your hand for a moment and strongly press it there to incise the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is weakened by chewing, and ensure that the tendon does not adhere and the nerve which causes this pain does not result in a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of synovial fluid in the artery that is incised, for in its incision there is a fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious or cautious; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regimen for the flow of blood following an arterial accident according to its manner, in this place of this treatise.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see in this patient that this cautery does not reach the wound and you find the condition of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have described, and cure the wound while it is healing.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on strengthening the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization for pains in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with conservative methods and another treatment as described in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture near the beginning, and let it be led to the environment of the whole ear thus as a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any place.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery of the hole of the ear little by little until you feel the place.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery reaches all points in the whole ear, and you withdraw it, then thoroughly cure the areas between as they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery for the wound.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The wound which is cured and treated with a cautery is only due to the substances that flow through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using the cautery for the substance that flows due to dryness or spasms of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that substance of the wound with jerris, capipurgi, and guarismes, and your treatment does not bring relief, then when you treat the disease with three cauteries: the first, the hole of the ear; the second, a small opening in its vicinity; and the third, the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the malaise, for relief only comes to the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is to apply the cautery on the outer side of the ear near a small area above the corner of the mouth, and on the temple, where the length of the application is according to the length of the upper lip, and then place your hand over the area until the quantity of the matter of the scabby lesion is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of the cautery, and it is specific to the surgeon, the form of whose practice is described below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that you use just a little, as if you could see it; and cut with the knife to avoid unnecessary roughness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over the area as described, keeping it treated until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said before and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of his head; and with a cautery and the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cauterization is made according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the opening of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it is treated as you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol.viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization for oblivion through flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large stones and pills of the servant's body.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then wrap the head of the patient completely and place plaster as described in the treatise on plasters on the scrotum.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for some beats, as that is a way of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the method and order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if these good methods work; and if not, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause for the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then proceed with the next cautery.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more heat and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition of heat, then cauterize there above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And proceed with the cautery while it is still hot; let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the figure above.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery treatment of hemorrhoids and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in modification of the head with stones and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle location of the head, and cauterize over all the horns of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for more and the patients tolerate the illness strongly, then cauterize that with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and directly with a cautery between where the spinal cord meets it, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that when it is healed, and this be a橄榄油 cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore cover that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the illness is great and the patient tolerates it except for the exclusion of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then for several days beforehand, prepare masticators and gargle remedies for the servant to modify.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the forehead according to the preceding method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those areas as I have said, while keeping the body paralyzed and softened on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are damp and thick flames, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have mentioned in the discussion on paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity diminishing into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place the patient's head upright, and carefully make a tartar over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient lie on his back, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And place the liniment; it is more worthy of an ancient shepherd to apply it.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient can bear when more of it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And place that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle, and let it remain until it is well rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once in all weeks, following the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to its condition, but keep your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a kind of cautery which moistens the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place that incised area on the border or on the folds of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery for water descending into the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the beginning of water in the heel has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which modifies the head of it, and keep the other free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And boil that sugar in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the scalp; and cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if the beginning of yeast water is in both heels, or one lump if the beginning of the water is in one heel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply the cautery to all the veins and arteries which you leave open; and let the cauterizations be in that long length across the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flows of blood when cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, as well as the caution regarding flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck leaving two bones with two cautery marks.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. xiii.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently present in the veins and arteries which are in the obvious location on the head and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic discharges, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the commencement of flowing water in the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add a graft, then cauterize that in all length of the hair line at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol.xiv.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that as we said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give to drink the cochias to the patient for three nights; and shave the head, and cauterize it with a medium cautery and an olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And cauterize that with a flower cautery on two cauteries above the eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the flower cautery is used in this way.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery similar to this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows with a small one from two cauteries in total, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	For the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted to parts inside and palm of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eye is converted to parts inside, I must treat the eye according to two methods: either with a cautery or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is from fire, command the patient before this that they let their skin be cleaned as those which are bathed, entered while they are extended and equalized; and if you pinch it there, then strengthen the heels with a bandage so that it does not get damaged while the skin is growing.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when they are grown and equalized, then place the head of the patient in a reclining position, and around the eyes of the heels of the cautery tent, mark with this sign the shape of a leaf of hawthorn, making it the beginning of the mark proper for the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And around place a small amount of honey or mucilage of flax on the heel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery with which this is done.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which was marked, little by little in stages, until the surface of the wound is burned like a hawthorn leaf, entirely apparent properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the heel already contracted and the hairs on it raised after the puncture of the heel.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place it over the wound between that the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply ointment there until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another time the cautery over that area just as you did first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and is equalized, so that the skin does not cover the heel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the skin be prolonged and equalized, and then make it of linen cloth in the shape of a laurel leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and a live caustic paste about an ounce. Mix these well, do this quickly so it is not diluted; spread this over the parchment which is made thus in the shape of a mulberry leaf, place that on one or both; let the root of the patient be in the middle.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the aforementioned on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is upon it thus like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, to perceive that the atrophy feels the bite, then let the medicine go and press it on the patient's chest as previously mentioned; therefore, when the bite ceases, then return the medicine and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid has been raised as it is washed; if so, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place where no pressure of the medicine was applied and ensure that your operation is not compromised and contract the area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the joint where the dislocation has been removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must, in performing your operation, keep watch with great diligence so that no error in medicine occurs. If the eyelid becomes softened and some cause of the skin puffs up in the eye, then reapply your medicine to that place where the eyelid has become softened, and do it in the same manner as at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the way of using the mulberry leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyelids of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore the operation should be performed according to this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of correcting it will not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal gland of the eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not apply your cure, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and let some minister hold the back of his head between your hands in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the cautery on the vein in the foot or on the wart of a blister over the heel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is round, as formed like a cane or a bird's claw, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, penetrate it into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it be drawn out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nonetheless, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient be disturbed, and then place the cautery on the nostrils and destroy that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, that is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it dry until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if more than ten days have passed and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is revealed and removed according to your decree in your treatise.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to treat a fistula, which some first doctors will say: identify the location of the fistula and do it there; then place your hand gently over that small fissure through which it is shaped: put in that location one ounce of melted lead; keep your hand well on this with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter where the melted lead does not reach; and pause above the opening of the bad humor as if in white of egg or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through a marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal draught and reduce the fistula to the nose's body according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery treatment of the wound from a boil.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Small vesicles often occur in the lips, and particularly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then when you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then ignite the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that hot hand over those cracks until the cautery reaches the base of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess is located in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and subsequently forms a boil, eventually breaks open, heals over, and then becomes chronic, forming a fistula, and your treatment does not improve the cure, then ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that ignited cautery into the track of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the burning iron reaches the base of it. Do this one or two times at the end. Then cure that with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the abscess is incised and healed, well; but otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the place and cauterize the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you have cured those with medicines without effect, then place the patient's head in hot water, and soon ignite the cautery in the form which will be described below. Try to pause the cautery over the tooth and insert it into that area strongly burning, keeping it just a little while so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times as you see fit.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should close his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cautery treatment for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a swelling, or if medical treatment does not bring relief, the cautery treatment for that area can be performed in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cow's horn cautery is done by taking a horn from a cow and boiling that part where the iron was attached. Then take a piece of it and wrap it around the end of the cautery, and immerse that portion in the heated horn, placing it over the painful tooth quickly before it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply it several times until the heat from the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do, soak some wool or a piece of leather in the horn mentioned above, and place it over the painful tooth. Then hold the hot iron over that area until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, however, the cautery with fire, you must attend to the tip of the iron or reed, and in its body some coarse substance be placed so that the heat of the fire does not reach the opening of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that part over the tooth and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well lubricated; and do this several times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth well and keep it that way for about an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you can determine or wish to.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery treatment for exstrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are due to phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you have the digestion of those lightly, then apply the cautery to the form of which this follows, having two open extremities so that smoke comes from one end through the other, and place that ignited over that abscess for a moment, and another if you find it necessary before it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and keep it over the hot spot between the time that the fire has consumed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply ointment and dress the wound until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery for hoarseness and the constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidity of the venous blood affects the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and then cauterize the depression below the diaphragm in the compressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And see to it that you do not apply the cautery to the diaphragm or burn the rib cage, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck and the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for the rib cage should be applied according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with what was preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old lung ailment, then cauterize that with two cauteries over the furcula in the compressed areas of the chest; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot between two mammary regions; and let the cautery for the rib cage be applied according to the form previously mentioned.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery puncture in the form of a puncta, the shape of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside the cells for those; and then cure that with what is applied when it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery having three edges; for the cautery is made in this manner: with one passage you can make three cauterizations according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery for tililic, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then by a small movement, it will be dislocated as it strives to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; and lift the chin which is in the inner part of the tililic to the outer parts above the thumbs of your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain where it penetrates into the other limb; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery has.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it is those subtle ones according to the quantity of the tenta; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for what the cautery .8. are.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery pores covered with salt, and then adhere the patient to bed rest, so that the limb is not swollen for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and heat is applied there, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is caused by moisture and humors that extract from its composition and multiply within it, and if you continue with the methods of cure and they do not bring relief, then you will find that the patient lies on his back, extends his hands and his legs, and then cauterize that area three times: in one cauterization place the foot with the width of a finger with a pointed cautery, and in two cauterizations place on both sides of the cautery so that the figure becomes triangular; and extend those not closely aligned to cause suppuration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the width of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be as follows: If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a circular cautery according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with points where the cautery is scared: and you prick the stomach with a point according to the quantity you wish on tent, then cauterize that with the cautery at the points; and cure that with the cure that is performed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol xxvii.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery for the sole of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the sole of the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness, which deviates from its normal condition through an excessive outflow, and the malady is not relieved by what we have said, then you should ensure that the sole of the foot is heated over its neck, and test with three cautery applications according to this form and quantity placed on the sole of the foot below the hips, the heat extending to the side of the body.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and the cautery according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not make the cautery too hot.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is applied is equal to the size of the quantity of the hotness of the iron, and it is not adjusted; and if the malady standing on the sole of the foot; and if not standing, then lying down, which has extended its parts, lifting its flanks.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you may sear these cauteries with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are sufficient.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not burn too much in the searing, but adhere to the subtlety of the entire cord so that the whole body is burned and it penetrates into the intestines; for the cord here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess in the foot and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences a severe swelling and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain becomes very acute, often to such an extent that it exhausts even the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then cover the patient's head with their pillow; and place the spot where the abscess is to be incised; and heat the cautery which is shaped like a blade, the form of which was shown on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cautery the area until the entire chain is burned, until it reaches the chipac, until in it there is healthy scab.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And place the cure for the others until the abscess is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And ensure that only those who have studied this in the art of medicine use it. Most of them are aware of the maladies associated with improper use. However, I have observed from experience several times its use in this operation, so I leave this to your discretion, for the better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery for piles.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for hemorrhoids should be made according to this manner. This is what you should do: take from the branches of aristologia a long piece of wood, which is found there, and let it have the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclined towards the side where the beard starts, and with two cauteries in what is inclined between the fifth rib and the hip bone, inclining slightly towards the rear sides; with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the rear sides; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries from both sides of the foot, placing the cautery where it is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather at the distance of the chain in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients have also said that certain men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until we bring it to the boil and it becomes sound, as we have said about the boil on the flank.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, there is no fear of burning, for he will soon recover in the place where the fistula occurs, which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the boil.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the boil, as we have said in the division concerning treatment, and do not align your cure, the cautery for it is according to three ways, all of which are rightful. The first way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the boil, following the figure of the cautery iron, the figures of which have preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have said for the cautery iron equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient be over its back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize, so that you ignite the cautery having two vertices, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the middle of the blade the hole through which the juice of the left thigh passes.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cautery can be applied according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vertices, ignite them, in the space where you pass the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you choose, cauterize with the cautery having three vertices.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery more when it has been allowed to burn for too many days; this is more conducive than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not for dropsy but for gout properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division and do not vary your treatment. Instead, if it is necessary to cauterize for gout, use four cauteries in the circuit of the swelling and one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the spinal bones of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be similar to the thickness of a finger.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And place the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of fever near the cautery where it is necessary, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by supportive healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form as described above, and it is with this that the two olive shapes are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and full of yellowish water, you should cauterize the feet on the outer side of the foot between the ankle and the thumb, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, as the yellowish fluid will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be applied as follows: And on each thigh, make two cautery marks, and on each thigh, apply the cautery at the end of the surgical knife's blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be applied along the length of the thigh: and place one end above the middle of the thigh, and the other below the middle; and on each thigh, make two cautery marks.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water residue from it can drain.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the ailments which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is inflamed due to infiltration by cold and humidity, it is caused by the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not apply any additional remedies. Sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue, so cauterize that part with a large cautery on their own stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach. Use the ring cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine fibers, use a subtle clavil cautery; or apply a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize that part on the pentellic membrane and on the intestines, and strengthen the stomach by applying two cauteries near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for rejuvenation of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not perform your own cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the pus spot, leaving a small triangular mark, and with a cautery above the navel down two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach is affected and the food has not been digested, and the face appears pale or jaundiced, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the navel, and another on the liver with a pointed cautery. Let the cautery remain in place for some time, and cure him only when he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cautery treatment near the ligation of the artery.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a spear.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments on those areas until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts around it.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is an old fistula in the nature behind and corrupted by good health and humidity, then what is most worthy to be tried is to use a fine probe, and you know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted vessels are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut from it, and it remains this way for a long time, then you can see that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from within, then you can see that it is penetrating or in the peril of the bone decaying, or this comes from one of those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts are painful due to inflammation or excessive moisture, and for this reason the patient's discomfort is reduced, then you should cautery those warts with a cautery over each wart using the claw-shaped cautery as previously recalled.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly cautery it the second time with a slight pause, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol. xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity, such that the patient retains urine, then cauterize it in its part, placing something over the bladder where the skin of the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toes; cauterize it with one cautery at the lower part of the big toe, or with two cautery points if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be applied according to how it is needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the vagina.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous congestion in the vagina with cold and humidity, and thus conception is prohibited, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the induction of labor is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to these conditions, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said for the bladder cautery; and a cautery over the lower part of the big toe, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be pointed.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery treatment for dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors infiltrate the area of the ankle and cause displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other leg when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated with the affected foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, make a circular incision on the foot around the ankle with the cautery, as you will have marked with a point along the circumference of the area as it is turned, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the form of the cautery as described above is used in the treatment of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three large olive枝繁叶茂的 cautery instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol forty.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said and you do not mix it, and this is ancient practice. Then apply a cautery to the area where you sense the presence of large humors through pills made from rotten substances or artificial ones resembling them.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Sir according to two scientific methods, of which one is to make three triangular cauteries over the broad part of the leg in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the width of one finger, whether the cautery is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cautery in the middle of each location on the back of the thigh, as there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended down the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended down the leg, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you will push the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cauterization on the heel, a little should be applied to the fibrous part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And for the surgical cauterization, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if you push the ankle where the pain is extended near the base of the toes, then cauterize there with three or four points, or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if you push the ankle and find pain in the heel of the foot, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such extent as to burn nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient harmfully or constriction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who cauterize on the sole and end in the cautery, and the bed is inflated where the tumor reached the foot, and fire perforates and corrupts all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follow a strong convulsion of the belly, and then death follows.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each separately according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery in the cautery of water, which is done in this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron, the diameter of which is the width of one palm; and its holes should be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there is another third; and the space between them is the quantity of a thumb's width; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those gaps is one thumb or two thumbs, and make on those iron edges decently fitted into the circles; this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	It is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, then placed on the part of the water, the patient lying on the mat.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three round cautery marks in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with broth and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Son, my children, we have used this type of cautery seldom because of the fear of its appearance, and due to what few of us have found regarding it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More than those who suffer from good cautery, he finds it in the place where it is applied.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More effective in medicines that adhere are those that you make two circles having a perforated frame through which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the walls where they are placed be such that they span two or three lengths.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened both below and above, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the side of the ankle where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the side of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be with a small fire gradually, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and allow the gout the biting and attachment of it — for that atrophy bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the ankle with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the attachment subsides, and let this be for some days, after which the inflammation will diminish; this is the method in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a pad containing water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way to apply water cauterization, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline solution and for the extinguished caustic, one part of each, three parts of water, and place them in a new vessel in which one part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Place the bottom of another vessel upside down over the alkaline and live caustic in water, let it absorb those until you can grasp them with your hand for good compression, and then allow the drop of the sharp water to fall from the part perforated into the inverted vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour the live caustic and renewed alkali over it; for then it will be of strong acidity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other limbs, for the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines, which are cauterized widely, such as terebinth and mel anacrat, it is tried that they be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of an ancient man's operation and cure for water pain and sciatic vein pain, magnifying the great feat of that one, and says that no other treatment was necessary, and he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in warm baths and exercises, as already said of him.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed near a vervain herb, and if no vervain is available, a fig recent should be used; it should be dried for a little with gray ashes and placed on the water in which there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be applied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient endures the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in warm water, and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that none of these medicines are used with a cautery except perhaps near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And now Escorides say that when making a cut in the tendinous vein it is cauterized, it will heal better; and let the cautery be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and on the calcaneus.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry cut of goat skin and immerse it in fire to make it char; and place it over the wool and let it be dried out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and continue doing this until the glow from the bite penetrates into the water and stops the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this way of using the cautery is called the cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain in the toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two legs is caused by multiple reasons, such as inflammation or puncture or excessive evacuation, and other causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not used for cutting, but only in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, open the space, then perform evacuation of the malaise with pills that resemble them, which are applied over each leg where the pain is three lines according to its width. Then mark any line five times with a cautery or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the leg.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medialawl cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol. xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cautery from the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	When observing this illness in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they have accidents regarding their structure at night, during sleep, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the back and those nearby that it is beginning to overmount the other vertebra.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that with a cautery shaped as a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured through a method of treatment and not alleviated by remedies, it is often treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize the area near the foot joint with a cautery to facilitate the evacuation in that region.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend into the toes or other joints, and you observe this, then cauterize that area on each toe with three or four cautery marks using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize that area and do not press your hand too closely against the cautery before, only around the size of the cone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the bladder and is called dysuria, then puncture along the course of the nerves as it twists, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves on each finger and over the back of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains remain for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the arms.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the bladder properly and with the reception of medicines, then even if good regimen and flame are applied, this cauterization will be in vain, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines, with the intestine visible through the skin at the groin, when this begins to appear, then as you command the patient to fast on that day and use gentle remedies so that the wound of his abdomen may close.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your thighs over his abdomen, and command him to keep his head between them until the swelling goes down or the skin or intestine becomes visible.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that pad to its place, and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar in diameter to the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is hot and glows with sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and put it there so that you can reach the bone of the shin in the middle of the thigh; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia so that it does not come to the patient's death or any other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be mindful that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as it could compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the place of the cautery for three days among other treatments until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it along with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that the nutrition is withheld according to the length of the healing time of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to lift the wound after 10 days, properly administer healing ointment, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And the patient should reduce work and replenish food and drink, and use strong voices, for when following this regimen of healing entirely, he will recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, if they do not tear further, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and what is drawn from the thigh should be done similarly to the tender part of it. Then take care of that place as we have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have said that a rupture should be seared with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed there for the width in the cuts above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciate cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery treatment for a tornio (likely a surgical term or condition).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in certain members due to closure or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should sear it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire member according to its size and smallness, its virtue and depth, and the location of the tornio and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, those pains are pierced in a member near the one where they occur, so that you may achieve the desired effect by the cautery while the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery for a long time, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you want to cautery treat that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to one we have cured as described in the division, neither of which it is. Be wary of the patient's condition where corruption might encompass his entire body and all its complexities; therefore, cautery the affected area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, leaving space between them, and ending at the forehead by the hairline; two over the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant (muscle).
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with a cautery slightly inside where it leaves a small impression in the cheek, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated. Cauterize over the cheek as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already spread over the thigh and manifestly apparent, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on both eyebrows, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the knee, one on the kneecap, and two on the ankles, one on each ankle, and two on the heels, one on each heel, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his foot; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the hand and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the bones of his legs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance to the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since the patient's body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limb and joints as indicated by the specifications of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with a mixture of burned flour and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. liv.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for numbing.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numbed or asleep and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases, a cautery is applied to certain stumps which affect the thighs and the feet, and the spine of the two, and examines the condition of the nerves which run through that member, and revivifies the stump.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume upon this, but only those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery treatment for swellings that become morula.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When swellings are old and do not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over that area with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the powder, until the whiteness and color of the swelling are revived, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is treated with flour of alum and lentils in rubbed oil and leaves of rosemary, or with the fat of dove or the fat of goat, from each take a part, all be mixed, and then apply a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the knee.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery the area with a circular cautery along the circumference as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery the area along its circumference in a circular manner as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for adenitis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as they are old and decrepit, have few veins, or due to time. If you want to hasten the maturation of adenitis; then cautery the area along its circumference with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the inflamed area where the probe will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the limb will be relieved; and then cure that which is to be healed.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery for corroding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding is a gradual corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corroding in a location where you intend to apply a cautery with fire, then heat the cautery with several small and large coals as appropriate for that location where the corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautery that completely, as you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And after that let it be for three days, and place a hot cloth over the cauterized areas until all the scabs have fallen off and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure that with ointment generating flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then iterate the cautery over what is raw in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And after medicating with some sharp medicines several times, use half of it in place of the cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, a cautery with fire is beneficial for superficial wounds.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.lix.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery for ulcers and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Small stones found in the foot of the sick person that are called clau, and this is a large cause, entered, which affects the foot; in those cases, two types of cautery are used, one with fire and one with water-based cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery with fire is when you heat the concave cauterizing tool resembling a pen tip, which is made of iron according to the quantity it should contain the stone from all parts, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the ignited cautery on the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be for three days until it begins to scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice to it using wild thyme boiled in salt water, and leave the poultice on for one night until the stone is fully expelled.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If so non-convertible, and many blisters occur on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then when you administer cauterization with water, take a ring of elm or iron or penknife, place it over the nail; then put in the ring of water a small quantity, hold your hand, and you rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the ring against the root of the nail, and you will find the water seep through the perforation of the nail; wait for the patient a little by the bite of the seeping water for an hour, then remove it, because the nail will have its roots eroded.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same to them and nearby where you come over all of which they have in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those boils where the roots of the nails have been eradicated by applying ointments where the flesh becomes inflamed.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to irritation of the nerves or fever as a cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the feet, and over the stomach, place an olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the health of the illness improves.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol. Lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cautery for white accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body white boils are spilt, and sores or fissures are made by materials grossly corrupted; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauteryed over the entire length of the fistula with a fine cautery using a sprig of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an iron rod from eristologia longua; or with a lancet-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they are not creased, and when the excess is ruptured, it makes them and heals them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, I prefer that this be done near the beginning of the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery for flux of blood from an injury by arterial incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times, there is flux of blood from an artery that is incised either at the wound site, or at the incision for an abscess or cautery on the member, and then it seems difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand firmly over the opening of the artery, and place it there until the bleeding has stopped, and let go, and do not allow it to recur.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then, over the fire, apply small and large olive cauteries, several times, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take a small or large one according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein forcefully press after you have already cauterized as I said, and keep the cautery between so that it narrows and restrains the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you press as I said and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery freshly from among those in the fire that are prepared, and continue to do this one after another so that the bleeding is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, or bring about another illness on the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding with a cautery, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted the ends of it are cauterized and the bleeding is restricted, or with ligature with pitch or with hay for strong constriction, or with bandages over medicines from which the virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tight with a pulvinar and proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May he who administers relief decently to him with the knife and with stricture of cloths or by position of causes burning and similar, not compare so much.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen to some and not be the doctor present or medicine, then open carefully with your finger the indicated part over the holes of that vein as we have said, and understand at the large constriction within which the scar has remained from the upper part of the wound, and above the archery the said do not be tampered; and above the archery let water fomentation of very cold friction be applied while the flesh is congealed and swelled; and may he cauterize or use medicine if necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and vents and of venesection and of wounds and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cautery forms; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one seeking this may be relieved of what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, listen, sons, that in this chapter we treat of the fear that is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore, listen carefully, for in the operation which is in this chapter, you must be wary of various evacuations which can lead to danger, where life is at stake; you should apply the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the abscess or puncture or excision or cleansing of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of the boil and their like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And for all of these, there is accompanying fear and trembling, and in the greater part of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not fall upon you in the position where there is a vacancy, for at times vacancies can lead to your mishandling of patients due to lack of experience.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some you will take to his illness and if it is light you let him die, and this because of the vehemence of what he finds of his illness, and for the length of the illness, and in the illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give to you their account and testimony, you expecting from that health, and his illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to him who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greediness; and do not presume any cause upon that but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and to which by succession glorious success shall come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients according to their prognosis and indication of them to which health is converted, for in that you have assistance in the acquisition of fame and memory, glory and honor.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have also established this chapter distinguishing it into chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cauteries, concerning the treatment from the head to the feet, so that you may be aided by what you ask for and about which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head during nursing.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it appears for hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and for all those whom I have seen it afflicts, death often follows, and thus it has been left to me to work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was full of water, and his head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and more importantly, the moisture increased to such an extent that it led to death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture or is added between the tendons and the bone, or is placed on the bone over the flesh.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And if the operation in that case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, you should make a slit in the middle of the place about the width of two fingers so that the moisture can drain, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is on the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the tendon widely separated and the water oozes out when you press it with your hand inside, but this is not what you are looking for.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone, you should make three slits in the middle of the place in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And draw out the incision completely to drain all the moisture; tightly close the slits with bandages and quilts; on the fifth day, pour oil over it and apply a mixture of water and oil; later remove the bandage and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and strengthen the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food with little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision, which consider as great the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, for in some passages it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and strive for flows of blood and delay the patient's recovery through this flow of blood by evacuating humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hasslers.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When one encounters a catharsis or wound in the heel or foot, this is an ancient practice, and you should not rely on the treatment of medicines for it; rather, the ultimate cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise those where the evil humor carries its head, then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tightly wrap the neck of the evil humor with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is in the vein; and the places over which these are close to the auricles pressing on them, and they are hidden from view in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with your hand, and incise each one with a sharp spatium entering into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatium leaving the artery and transect it at the incisions on the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the wound is closed at the pulsating exit, which leaps forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and press with your hand, and do this into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pint, and more or less it throws out, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the filling of the artery of him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of scab remains on the bone, cut this away so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and pieces of cloth, and then cure that with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute migraine occurs due to dampness and the quality of the vessels in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if this does not bring relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men through the strength of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you incise the skin with it until you reach the artery; and then insert a probe into it and extract that part above until you remove it from the skin and uncover those of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it with the tip of the scalpel, and then incise a part of it according to the quantity for which the ends of it are long and contracted, and thus will not allow the flux of blood; for if not incised, it will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the vein one. into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations with a needle doubled strongly at each or with threads long, and do not cut into it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two sutures; and do this at that time or nearby another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical cautery where the sutures are made, and it will serve in place of that metal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of febrile composition; for the cautery is among those causes that help with final humors, and therefore it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And you should then perform the extraction of the arteries that you place in the correct location, and let them dry over fine powder properly made, and afterwards heal it with dry medicines so that flesh arises and in time it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand within so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any of those reasons it is not at your presence, then place your hand over the area until the bleeding is constricted, and pour cold water on the area until the inflammation subsides, and strengthen according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And for the lighter case in extracting from an artery, you should cauteryize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with probes, and place hot pincers between them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein can be elongated, which are not completely cauterized by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two knives is essential.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the acute pain is such that two knives are better, for if sharp like two knives it approaches each part quickly, and you do not cut the flesh too swiftly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then, when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire in those areas and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more slight.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for bodies affected by acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which run over the top of the head, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being traversed by ants, and the eyes become weak, moistened, and seem to be known, with the eyelids scalded by the acuteness of the tears, they should use antiseptic remedies in the cure of those for this operation, and name that cure "spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin on his forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on another part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them where the bleeding stops.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the point of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the temple part into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cavity which is above the bone, and then do this with the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then incise this space and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then place the blade of the sharp side against the adjacent flesh, cut the tissue inside the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, squeeze the areas of the ankle joints where the blood has pooled.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand on any gouty fissure of the old foot, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day after ligature and administer a large infusion of horse chestnut water, and then cure what is treated with an ointment of basilicum in olive oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of tears through purgation and those phlegm drops descending from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute purgation continuing, and the gouty drops from the foot are small and weakened, and their appearance shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of this condition the skin, in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent swelling, then you can see from these accidents that the materials and purgation do not come from venous motas within the parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these cases is this: you command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small slit right through the middle of the forehead, about the width (and start from the left temple between the right temple; and let the incision go into the bone; and extend your hand from the ridges of the temples which are very painful, you should saw through), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then insert between the two edges of the wound a piece of cloth or sponge.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen on top with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you lift it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then rub the bone inside where the new flesh begins to form, and then cure that with an exsiccative regimen which makes the flesh mature, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's origin.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the cure of what attacks the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that attacks the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and vein, or it is from plant, such as mustard or bean, or it is a fluxible cause, such as water and wine and their like, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a black cat jumps into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or press in the ear, and you pause the ear to the sun, and if you touch the black cat, then it distills in that certain cause of violet oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are usually expelled by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then perform the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled by the gesti, well done; but if not, then perform the extraction of it with the fine, doubly curved hook.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not expelled by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it is not too large but only the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the bile with strong suction, for too many passages like what we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	And if it is not extracted in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar-soaked cloth, upon which the breasts are placed a quantity, place that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around that area properly.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the canal of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not extracted by all the causes we have recounted, then you should operate to excise that which intends to become an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to excise it is that you begin by incising the malate of the phasic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, then make a crescent between your fingers and convert the ear to parts above, and make a small fissure in the ridge of the ear, place its greys in the well-padded area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure of lunar figure reach to the heel, and, if the heel is blackened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then immediately apply speed in that hour, and cure it while it is sound.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause settles in the ear is one of those oils that clog and are inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your application, then take thin subtle spatum according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer the extraction of that oil which is settled in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it in those areas near the cartilages or with subtle gestures, as we have said before, for it facilitates the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses to sneeze with a cold, fill it with some old rag, and pour this water over the ear in which the water is, and if by this it is forced out, well; but if not, then take threads of blue or lion's wool according to the length of the finger, and boil those in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those into the traucheal part of his ear and shake over a part of that mixture and strike it with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying the perry until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been completely expelled, try taking a piece of paper or cotton, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the cotton is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of cotton and do this several times until all the water has been completely expelled, then squeeze out the excess with a cannula as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, carefully and gently treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a larger object causing immediate pain, then perform the extraction quickly and decisively, as the cause is less severe compared to other causes that may occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	For the extraction of a worm in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem to be effective, then carefully examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open, this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck it with strong suction, doing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if your attempt does not succeed, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your application be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, stretched out, in which there is a small hole, and a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it should be done in order to have it in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you want from these—those are in the auricle—and insert the wick carefully above, pressing it with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot withstand this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children inherit the cavities of their parents' non-perforated ears, and this happens in some adults as well, with an abscess in the meat of the ear due to a wound or without any apparent cause; sometimes this abscess forms in the preauricular region which does not show external signs, and sometimes it occurs in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the region of the loins, which does not present a visible wound, is in the major dispositions of difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see the wound, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent abscess, open that with a thin lancet from which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the lancet where the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the lancet has two points to prevent it from lodging in the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the abscess is in hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then use thin lancets and incise that area forcefully until all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the abscess is in the region of the ear, then take a thin pointed lancet and heat that iron a little in fire, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so, if you sense an abundance of that which the patient suffers due to difficulty in urination, increase the pressure on it by means of urination; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cloth over the ear according to the amount of swelling you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you insert some and press it into water and powder it over the dry trissar, using it; and if you see the ear already perforated, then remove the pus and replace it with another liquid which you wrap in a cloth made of linseed oil, until the abscess is drained; and cure it as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a bloody flux occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in fresh water, wring it out, and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the care of swelling which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Swelling of the eyelids which sometimes become moist, at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then take those that have been heated or boiled, and incise them over the swelling of their eyelids, and place your hand over the areas just applied.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of warm blood, then cauterize those points with a thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is over the incisions, and the wounds heal when there remains any cause of their swelling; and when they are cauterized with fire, those swellings are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care for great swelling in the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swelling in the eyelids of the eye sometimes occurs due to some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called great swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is palpable at all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a incision there for its width, and then probe it from all parts with ease as you evacuate, and suspend it by an ounce and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you do not have means for making the incision there, so instead that you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision bit by bit, then this is noted in no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the ointment of it restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is decreasing in the parts inside the eyelid, you adjust the inner surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the enlargement by an ounce, or another you choose for incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is stretched by incision, this is noted in no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the area with salted water; and dress the place with a dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is caused by gray matter that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and most frequently affects children, aggravates their ailments, and may lead to their death; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because this causes tears to flow into those areas.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this, they often cry on their own faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; only above their left eyelids are their eyebrows wet, which already cover inflammation, and the imminent appearance of excision is in the eye; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you can feel excision among those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that the patient rests his head on your hand, and then you place a cloth around him and her, making a girdle according to the quantity it contains of arthnach from all parts, and then place it over that and press with your thumbs all around so that excision is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then make a slit in the middle of that wetness by incising along its breadth, and let the slit not be larger than the slit made in flautotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding part where you open the wound completely until you reach the arcarnach, for in the later stages you proceed to incise through a fissure according to the form of the white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thumbs and fingers, and mix between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not press too hard at the fissure, so that you do not injure the muscle and leave it loose.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if your alternach does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, rather that you press a little bit at the fissure as you proceed with your alternach; then extract those as we have said; and then immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so apply salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to remove what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying linen plaisters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye there are tight openings that cause natural skin to become dry and wrinkled, then those signs are means of illnesses such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue. This can be a cause of damage to the eye, which is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: either with a cautery from fire; or with acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol on cautery; or by incision and suturing; or with cannulas as I will say later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then ensure that you place the head of the patient in your left hand; near this, move the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it can be moved, it is good; if not, insert a needle into the one where the thread of the incision was made on the edge of the eyelid, and drive the needle with thread upwards, so that it penetrates close to the margin of the eyelid where the skin joins, close to the skin, and pull the thread towards the upper part of the eyelid, then move that part.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skin tightly against the aqueous humor of the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal sac; and extract the pus, powder it with small pieces of cork or cloth, and sprinkle on the eyelid with a tent, as shown by the figure of a mirt leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Moreover, I must clarify that the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for which varies in women, and those among them who need a significant incision from the eyelid based on the amount by which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make the aqueous humor along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal sac.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and scrape that area entirely, and then stitch the two edges with a thread or fine woolen string, and clean the exudate, and apply what remains from the strings over two sutures for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and if not, you do not proceed.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, leave the stitches of the wounds between three and four days, and then heal this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and heal it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should seal the wound and its addition; more stitches are better. Therefore say this to the ancient taxanirs.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But more importantly in it be diligent about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in its fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another way to treat it, and that is to figure the eyelid as a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separating and joining according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, hold the pins, and this is not exact, then take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties such that the threads are equal, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire bundle on which it is marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to make an incision or a fissure, sew that abscess with thread and match its appearance, and apply ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases on the eyelid, if its edges need to be converted, then use the incision method we have described; but sew only when it is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat canthiaria (an inflammation of the eyelid margin) according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside, as I have recounted; then make two canthri (small sticks or splints) or two thin strips of material whose length should match the length of the eyelid and their width should be similar to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of each division, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Approximately add some subtlety over what you have excreted from the eyelid of the wound, and compress the canals of various parts with strong constriction, and let that remain for a few days, because the scab through the constriction will die and be rejected and it will be possible after that to fall by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the crust on the sores, and proceed to cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then since it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of stinging skin in the wound, use an awl when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging wounds, the operation for them is that you take a thin awl and place it on that fine thread of each hair, and then carefully adjust the ends of it using tiny nuts in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the field be the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then make another fine field briefly, and use the ends of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a warm bed, and keep it close to the sun so that your work is effective, as it is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the edge of the cut skin, adjusting it with a tool you have prepared, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while extracting the one above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin up and insert that into the incision, with the skin being one or two or three layers, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand through so that the skin is loosened in the eyelid with alcohol on the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the alcohol is applied and the skin is not loosened, pull the alcohol-soaked piece of cloth to the sides with the field you have made, so that in doing so the alcohol from the wound will remain.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And wrap that part with a cloth, for when you have tied the thread and tightened it, and closed the wound, leave it open for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, elevate it at that place, or let it grow over some space, and then elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of ahetherization which occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is ahetherization in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that conveys to its upper or lower part due to poor consolidation of the wound or section or cautery, it is called leporina. This ahetheration can be natural or accidental, and is caused by the consolidation of the wound or sections or cautery, or by resemblance to such conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	For the method of the operation, you should cut away the consolidation and separate the edges of the wound. Place a strip of linen in between them, and tie those edges together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do this it will worsen the condition more than doing nothing at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and apply it to the water in which are cooked herbs or linseed, or a liquid unguent, and immerse the hand in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture only what is not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but a correction of hernias that do not return to their original form.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure for hernias which is performed in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia which is performed in the eyelid is called specifically a vertian hernia; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidentally it is caused by a wound or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal of the right, so that the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incise with a broad blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the thread and place it in the incised figure, and with that, turn the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the tissue of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremities of the two fissures be at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they are brought together they form a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then bring the flesh there to the amount that is the length of the sharp point left out, what we call the palpebra.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and close them with a thread of wool; and then treat those with what we have said about the softening medicines and the waxes until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise for a fissure or suture or cautery, then make the incision in a straight line on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the wax between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the discourse on the cure for incision when it is above or left behind, let it run in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that is in the form of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise craftsmen always prepare engen in any manner that is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to their convenience during the operation and with the instruments in the major arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid above by securing it to the white of the eye, and prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert the pointed needle and release the eyelid, or extend it over the eyebrow, or widen it over the upper eyelid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle scalpel, which should not be of great sharpness, having a slightly obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Remove the scab to avoid damaging the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it excoriates the adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then place salt water in the eye, with which you rinse it; or use distilled water溶解在水中。
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the swollen area of the eye, and place over the swelling infused wool in honey, and for three days use conservative methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the gland and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal apparatus.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the gland can be performed in two ways, either nerve-like, which is similar to a thin hard cord; or non-nerve-like, resembling a white thickened moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is divided and the moisture is not injected into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of performing the incision in the gland is that the patient places their head in a tilted position, then opens their eyelids, and elevates the eyelid with your hand. Then, you collect the gland with a small amount of moisture and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or bull or cow, or similar, or strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; extend it to the parts above, and peel off the skin the liquid of the nail which cures the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you follow it under the skin to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the rim of the eyelid with a thin spatum or small pincers, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that by the incision it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with the sole of the foot stretched or with thread, as we have said, and then it is peeled off with a lion's spatum, which is the form of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatum you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the incision make a small cut with salted steel or iron made from tin, and leave that inside for another day; then cure that which is within so that it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the swelling is not nervous and you cannot put the needle there, then spots of this kind of swelling are cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as described in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the space of the malady and take a thin slice of hot steel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and confluent and embedded in that tissue, then distill from your mouth into the wound of steel made from tin or of rusty iron or of salted steel, and cover the wound with another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeatedly perform the operation until all that is of it is removed, so that instead an abscess does not form in the wound; then leave that, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation as much as necessary until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The lacrimal gland, if noticed to cause great discomfort, should be suspended by an onion; and incise part of it, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then let the lacrimal gland drip with hot rog and apply a dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of algazardenic and what arises from flesh pressed into place.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases in the eyes, pressed flesh rots and grows, and is over-packed until it covers the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids and swells, pressing the eyelids to the parts outside and adheres to the edge of the eyelid.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in the eye is that the patient places his head in the heat; then open the eyes and collect all that flesh with suitable incisions, using forceps or tongs; then incise the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep the opening covered to ensure you do not lose track of your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be where you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small pincers from which is taken silk according to the form it will take in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is reamed out, let the wound be filled with coarse salt, or sprinkle upon it powder resembling that of corrosive sublimate, and place something over the wound outside as a paste of alum until an abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of alguniche (a type of abscess) is guarded and seared with cautery, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what yields the abscess, and repeatedly perform on that area until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which you encounter in the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must ensure that all cure of the wound by way of natural healing or by accident be left to nature. Do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collecting sweat in the well.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sweat so veins rogas which are swollen over the well and prohibit their operation, and expand the well for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider if the well in which sweat is collected is strong and contains no other illness than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in cold water, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle doubling according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or let it be two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with strong subtlety, in subtlety, and cleanse the sweat hour by hour, while observing that those veins are drawn from the well and are stirred.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And guard thou that thou lead not the hot iron to the extremities of the spine; and if thy operation in midday before the sun, and be steadfast in thy operation that thou enter not save those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when thou hast completed, then distil thou in the hot vinegar or rue to cause that which is removed from the sore to acquire its acuity.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for thee to collect all in that hour, then plaster thou wholly with that which relieves the pain thereof, and let it be for a few days until the pain thereof is subdued and an abscess secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to the manner of the sore as it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the fórfeixs:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol.xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When thou curest hernias with a cautery or with burning acute medicine according to the narration of its history and it is not healed, then do not hesitate but cut into the abscess to await its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone and veins within are discovered to be腐烂或变黑，你便要用一种工具处理它们，这种工具的形式如下：
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named aspre cap, and made of iron, with a round head such that when holding it, the head is punctuated by holes made with a file or delicately punctuated (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your pincers, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive treatments.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and has good hidden flesh, and the diseased part is removed from the body for 40 days, and does not regenerate, nor腐烂再现，且没有发生意外事故，你便知道它已经痊愈。
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and do so according to this manner: you uncover the bone with iron or sharp medical instruments, and as the bone is discovered, you take three pieces according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument be enlarged at the extremity as you see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little more, and then turn your hand among the grooves until the entire bone is penetrated, and it feels the pain through the hole it finds as air exits when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with medicinal powders drying as they should be done.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then since the flesh is dry and the place is hardened, the material which it was exuding to the surroundings returns to its normal state, thus this is lighter for the pain.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the swelling.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of sensation, then you should relieve the pain, subsequently follow with scarification and bleed at the neck several times; place warm liniment made of acetate of lead and aloe and enses and dragon's wax over the swelling, and firmly apply the plaster with powder on top.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of powders is that you take linen cloths from lion's mane, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make those folds.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to be used.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tightly bind them with a firm bandage; and repeatedly apply the suction cups with several incisions; and then place the suction cups and leave it tight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the bandage becomes moist, then change it to be tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then place the bandage on the area during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the bandage along with the suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Book XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the sclera.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it protrudes and appears like a degree of scar, and this forms the shape of a person, and you wish to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from one part to the part above, and then place another needle with a double thread in the part of the lacrimal, and let the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it over the thread soaked in album of honey, letting the thread remain in the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the wound with what will comfort it as the injury heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth around the wound, and then let it protrude with a fine needle that comes from under the edge of the wound, carrying the humoraceous fluid, which reduces the swelling and enters quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen as it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called an ulcer is nothing but a wound that appears similar to water descending and is not the other.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The way to treat it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, and then take hold of their head with your hands at two parts and pull them gently where you see the wound bring the health to the edges, and then dry it thoroughly so that it does not descend, and keep the light, and the patient will see the causes as if they were seeing.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend to the lower parts, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of health is not prepared as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and then take a fine spath and do so over the conjunctival tissue, gently brushing a little along the continuation of the conjunctiva on the cornea (in the area indicated), until the health is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, as it is forgotten, when you distill into the hot water in which you have mixed honey or sugar in the water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending from above.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is appropriate to perforate as we declared, then proceed according to its healthiness.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must place the patient's thighs on a cushion and tie the area tightly with a string.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected side, if the side with the water is the left side; or place your right hand, if the side with the water is the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then place your right hand on the pillow, if the side is left; or place your left hand, if the side is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the hand close to the crown due to the size of the ray in the white of the eye from the lower lacrimal gland, and then cover the hand with virtue and turn your hand there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the hand is already permeated by virtue.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And note the size of the hand's passage when pressing against the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the black part, for this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through the hand with the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the hand inside the location where the water is, and then draw it down a little bit several times. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then you see the patient below where his vision reaches quickly, and the hand in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you continue with another downward movement before the hand is fully inserted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the abscess with facilitation, and roll your hand little by little over it, and return a small piece of clear salt into water and with that wash inside thoroughly; then place outside a cloth or stopper or infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie with this the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May our Lord and those of our time pause over this with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the abscess does not yield to your probe due to its hardness — which is common in some men whose flesh is hard — then scrape out the pus which is called albidus, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture that conjunction, and do not withdraw your hand into the wound, but rather make a way to the abscess location beneath.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the probe as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, so prepare the patient's sleeping bed decently made in which he lies on his back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in his nature as such so that his nature is smoothed, and do not let his head tilt to the right or left side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the ligament should be placed according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that one in the more obscure area and expose the frozen vision, and make the eyes some causes, and then return the ligament on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this during the hour of cure or very close to the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have you already done this so that the water may flow slightly freely and vigorously through the regardment.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	More if you happen to find an abscess, then remove the pus before the seventh day, and correct that with what gives way to the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And when you have cleared the vision of the patient and pause over his face near the mouth so that the swelling of the cheeks may subside, let him remain for some days in the more obscure area.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it should be gradually withdrawn and changed in its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused the disciple from seeing some times, and then you be near the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have been informed of some cases in which they are affected by the Artach, and some say to make fire in the Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is extracted.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaam so that he may know them who ignores them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of iron or properly of steel, and their ends should have this subtlety triangular, the sharp end like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of flesh nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise various growths from which some cause is gathered like the sting of a heavy pest or a polyp; this illness is called polypus, which is similar to that pest represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is fleshy, dark in color; and from it comes the fleshy lion not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy growths not fraudulent nor cancerous, first separate the illness by pressing your fingers and place it in the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and prick the tumor in those fleshes.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it to the outer parts, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin blade from which you can see that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause where division is possible, then quickly cut this with one of the fine instruments so that it may be divided for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If there is an abscess or an infected boil, then pause at it where it conforms; if it is a malignant abscess, then incise it and cauterize the area from which the pus will be drained completely.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply hot poultices to the nose near the incision and apply either heat or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and there is a process of humidity entering the palate, then you can see that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you can see that inside the nose there is no flesh but only bones of the nose where incision has not been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then, where there are any lumps in the nose, use myrrh and sprinkle it in the nostril. Place the quantity of a finger or less between each nut, insert the other extremity of the myrrh into the nose using a probe or another method that is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, let its odor enter through the nasal passages and settle on its gold thread. This is why many children at school find it amusing to perform this action, but it is a light matter for one who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two extremities of the bowel, one that protrudes near the nose and the other that enters the nose, and then apply a flesh clamp at the site where the nerves are in the bowel, and do this before you can sense that the flesh is on the nerves of the bowel.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the bowel, place something in the nose near the opening of the nostril, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it heals.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need to speed up the cure, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal infusions, where oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling that.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a tube closed like a cane, and the end of the instrument maker's canula should be flat, open; into which you shall manipulate it from behind, with which you will have that through which you heat oil or what you want from the juices and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this purge is precious: recipe of castor oil, of white oil, of cinnamon, of saffron, of long pepper, of escafedia, of one drachm of spice juice, mix with wheat and caulis juices, and make pills, and take a pill moistened in clear water, and give it to the patient smelling from the nose facing away.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of ulcers in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Moles that appear as ulcers at the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged and oozing for several days until the mole is noticed.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should intervene at the beginning of the appearance of the mole, and excise all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place your hand over the spot or cautery or burning medicine which was at that location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, consider if it is ripe, hard, of dusky color, and of little sensation. Then do not touch that with iron which is an abscess; for motas (small spots) often appear in that which you incise this abscess because of its great malice towards the one upon whom it had acted.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is from a blow and not of dusky color, and incision is possible throughout, then drain the poison and incise that without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On suturing the nose, the lips, and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by a wound or similar injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should consult with several experts rather than acting alone.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then examine when there is any such cause of those, whether it is fresh wound blood, and then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suture, and place it so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of separation are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then examine that you extract each part of its tendon before it exudes blood.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ninefold resin over them, and place a piece of transparent bandage on the powder, or some other consolidative plaster, and leave that paste for two days or three. Then remove it and change the plaster, and let it heal until the threads dissolve by themselves.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	More on the method of suturing, you should add the continuity solution or thread as we have described in suturing the abdomen, or add the continuity solution with threads as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	For the extraction of those causes that occur in both cheeks in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Small spots appear in the internal parts of the cheeks and grow into hard boils resembling lard, some are small while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully extract all parts of the cheeks and glands around those hard swellings, and after the incision, fill the area with tripe skin strips to tighten the wound, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the area with astringent water until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	For the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Large spots first appear on the flesh adhered to the gums, which the ancients called "albulus." Then, you should suspend that part with a thread or ligature, and make an incision there to allow the pus to drain or the wound to heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place something warm or another astringent or excitatory powder over the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth both inside and outside, and between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some are blackened, and others are yellowed or decayed, causing corruption to the gums, the teeth become painful.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you must make an incision in the patient's thigh and place its head in a bowl of water, brushing the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear, ensuring that no cause is left unbroken, and doing this to remove the blackness, yellowing, and other such changes.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning is good, well and good; otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning to those other days and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have often required incisions in various forms and of diverse figures according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, with the razor by which the tooth is cut from the inside, it is another razor by which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you must prepare, which you will often see.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cave that when you treat the tooth of its pain with great skill and delay the entire extraction, because no cause can substitute for its removal when it is extracted, as a substance is sublimated during the process of extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	More importantly, know that when the patient is forced to extract the tooth, you must firmly be certain which tooth is painful, because many times the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is in a healthy tooth. Therefore, you extract the allegedly diseased tooth, and soon the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certified which tooth is painful, and that you know well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which some virtue may be contained, so that it dissolves from the root of the tooth by all means, and then use those ties or fine scissors gradually from the beginning little by little so that those concussions occur.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then moisten it well with strong ties for good speech or strong injury, and place the head of the patient between those ties so that they do not suffocate, and then extract the tooth according to straightness in a manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not extracted, then take one of those instruments, and place it well around the tooth with ease and effort in such a way that it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap it with cloth and tighten it at the end of a fine thread so that it does not break during your operation on it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And ensure that you operate meticulously around the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the illness because its malignancy is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their manipulation and audacity regarding the eradication of their work; for they do not administer what we have advised; which malignant spots can bring great illnesses upon men, which are harder to treat than broken bones, and the reasons for their failures all, or some of those, or that they extract from certain bones of the jaw as malignant spots we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are fluxes of poison for this, as malignant spots often do, then take some ginger and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long extended, short manageable, and thick, so that they do not bend when you need to use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so it is that you use large needles when they are tight, make them short and pointed.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of iron from India, straight and pointed at the tip. At the tips of these, there are teeth that enter each other and are strongly fixed by construction. Some times, the tips of these are in the shape of a heron's bill, called a ciconia, and are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Fractured Jaw Bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured due to some cause, first ensure that you apply pressure to the area carefully for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the tips of which are shaped like the bill of a heron (called a ciconia or guanta), the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of the forceps should be made in such a way as a file orawl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not obey you, then cut over the crack and spread all the flesh open, and insert the instrument which is named atali, that is a small lever of which the shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And briefly, let the end be thick at one point and thin, so that it is not twisted.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the crack is not punctured, it is well. Otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular-ended, in which there is some thickness at the end.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for the rasp of teeth; for this young person, this instrument, which resembles a large claw, is made as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not engulfed such that it is not twisted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle craftsmen find means by themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify to them; for there are ailments to which the ancients neither would nor could apply their proper instruments due to the forms of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are twisted, or if you must, then place a weight over it in its location. This is what is convenient from among the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture from which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be some small swelling gradually, and hold or press it with your hand so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is thoroughly pierced; then apply appropriate medicines to the area.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a small pus, then drain that pus and the blackness from it, and cure that once it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural position, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is slightly close to another tooth and cannot be removed by extraction or there is no gap between them, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise that tooth with this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, and make it from fine Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you incise that tooth over multiple days due to its hardness, and that it is not another tooth among the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominently exposed and needs to be smoothed, then smooth it with a fine Indian iron file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all made of iron and steel; and let there be small pointed points thus like a file from which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over days for convenience, so that there is another sharp tooth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And draw one there at the end, and cut another with a few razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken and the fracture pricks the tongue, then you should file that area where the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and smoothed, so that the tongue does not get injured and the word does not become distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth suffer from concussion or removal due to impact or extraction, and the patient is unable to strengthen the area where decay has set in, and you have treated this with styptic medicines without success, then for those that are strong use gold foil instead of silver, because silver turns green and may corrode over a few days, but gold does not change at all.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the honey be in such fineness and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the honey and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will be two wrinkles of the honey between two molars, or one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then push the tissue into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not molar.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be such that when you pull the honey you should tighten the roots of the teeth so they do not slip.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the excess threads of the honey with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And let it stay thus tight as a Roman belt.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those wounds in such a manner throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the way of the teeth and the figure of aligning two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these bindings:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the socket, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they are replaced.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by just any craftsmen or fools.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fitting for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol.xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue in some intervals or is natural as one is born with it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, whose head exists in the operating table; elevates the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its anchoring.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of a wound, then you gently incise it along the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolve the induration.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous tissue and that you incise here without cutting the arching tendon, so as not to cause a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision with vinegar or with wine or with cold water; and place the tongue in a cushion; so that the patient keeps the tongue out at night to prevent it from becoming hardened again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, place a vitriolic plaster on the area; if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the location with a long-cautery suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with other treatments as the patient recovers.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a cyst, let the tongue proceed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an abscess resembling a small boil appears, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient wide before the fire and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, then do not touch that area.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, in which there is moisture, then you place the onion in it and incise that with a sharp blade, dividing it completely. And if blood flows during your operation, then cover it with a vitriol plaster, so as to restrain the blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with warm water and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of boil from both ears and that which is near the jaw and other boils.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a boil is found near the jaw, these are glands that are closely assembled lymph nodes, which sometimes appear outward and are named the two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and if they do not heal, then consider whether the boil is hard, of dark color, and has little sensation; then do not touch it with a iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron to prevent the flow of blood; first let it mature, and then either you will lance it or it will break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, small, and the root is fine, then this is to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on them is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already been drained completely or if it has diminished somewhat; and then you cut open the patient in front of the sun, their head is in your lap, and you hold their mouth, and the servant taking between their hands the tip of the tongue of the patient, leaves with the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on that tongue and show it to the patient, and place your thumb over it firmly, then take an oncia and put it under that, and pull that outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then place that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which are made of iron and well tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not present, then incise that slit from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one slit, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and near the incision, the disease will be relieved by washing with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, relieve it with water from the decoction of bark of dog's-bane or of rue and similar to those causes that constrict the flow of blood, and cure it when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes boils appear in the groin or other abscesses besides those of the two ears, and incise them according to what is said in the incision of two slits equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, and had closed the groin area. The woman was breathing directly, and had been forbidden to eat or drink any water, and she was near death if more days passed without water for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already matured so much that there were two fingers' width between them which would go through with two thrusts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I incised it sharply and clamped one of its ends, then pulled that end, and the large portion came out. Then I incised the other part, and pinched its mouth, held its tongue, and clamped the other end in the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I incised a large part of it, and there was not much blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the swelling of that woman subsided, and she began to drink water soon, and then eat food. Then I continued incising that abscess for a long time without stopping, and an abscess formed in its place, which kept recurring as long as that one was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I engaged in this and cauterized the swelling of it, according to ancient practice; then I wandered around and did not know what God had done to that nearby me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol.xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When cutting the vein when it is stretched out.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm settles in the uvula, and it is stretched out and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not see your cure, and thus you know that the abscess cautery has already passed and become subtle, then seek to incise that which is added round; if it is at that length, and is bloody, of dusky color or black, and not a centimeter, then fear the incision of it, for there is fear of the disease.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut out the disease and press the tongue with the instrument by which its form is determined and then place the ounce on the new, and pull that down and incise it with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two bites.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be sure to insert only what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you insert more, it will alter its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And near the insertion, use what we have described for the insertion of two fingers, and ensure that it is healed within.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient is frightened by the insertion, be sure to use something for comfort in the cautery to ease his fear, and the way of the cautery on him is simply with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient's penis in your hand, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as we have said. Then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and apply it to the living part without being too thick or thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the external part of the cavity where the medicine is applied be as wide as the width of a ray's tail. Place the instrument on the medicine over the vulva, and the patient should spit into his own hand so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the internal medicine, thus not staying there for any reason due to the swelling in him and making it pass.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off over three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and then cauterize the area around the uvula with a cloth dipped in boder, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula by the medicine, and let it be washed with water, and be externally treated with an application, and internally with remedies until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is both safe and long-lasting without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scitrus Arabicum, camomile, powder of these herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one vessel, and be submerged in water, and boil; let the liquid be well strained, and in the middle of the liquid a sponge, over which an instrument congueille of iron according to this manner; make it of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor goes to the uvula over the quanela, so that the uvula becomes somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then it repeatedly passes over those spots several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of carbuncles, for it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a hive end on the tip of it, so that the mouth of the patient opens, for the hive end prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious from the wound or thorn, by which you can see it. After that, press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that you may be made aware of what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, cause the patient to vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if a strong cause attached to the wound is vomited, it will be expelled; or have the patient swallow a piece of linen or a slice of radish, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well soaked in wine, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, because it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a worm and gently insert it and then remove it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And apply his head upward, and hold it steady at his throat, so that the touch of his bone in the throat or the one wrapped around the bone or spinal column reaches him, or as the doctor places his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, if the patient can insert honey, by his knowledge of the location of the cause, wrap it around below, and pull his hand toward the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is applied.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty humor related to the gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated with gouty humor as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the side of the foot suffering from gout in the sun, after you have understood the language of the disease with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gouty humor, extract it either through a small needle or through fine and delicate instruments.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the foot suffering from gout, and place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the gouty humor is dead and remains in the foot) and keep the foot away from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, open its mouth over the affected area, and wash the area with that; and do not swallow any of it, but pour the water again onto your hand for another hour, as soon as you feel the gouty humor beginning to soften.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it has not been previously fumigated with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the groin with cypress or asafetida through the instrument we have mentioned in the uvula fumigation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall into place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing the fumigation is to take a brazier in which burning coals are placed, and cover the brazier with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfumigation; and hold the groin at the end of the cannula, and seal its mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then repeat the subfumigation several times, and make the groin abstain from drinking, eating salty or similar foods, and not drink water. Thus, this regimen must be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And it is placed on the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and it is filed with a file, so that when any cause is caught, it does not leak.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the main discourse on carbuncles and their sections is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The carbuncles are special nodes, of various types, according to the memory of them, for each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and section by two methods. Of which one is according to the type of carbuncles themselves; and through this, we address the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the places where bodily accidents occur, for a carbuncle that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs on the foot; and a carbuncle in a fleshier location is different from one at a joint; and for each of them, their judgment is made through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be pierced but at maturity of the health in those or complement of their.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses some of which cover that they be lanced when crossed, and are not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are near the joints, for an abscess which is near a joint, its nature is extended into what is in the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making a cause of contraction of that member; or is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the lancing of it until it is matured it will affect the principal member; or is near the anus, therefore lance what is not mature; and do not lance crudely, for lack of digestion, but one near the anus, so that it does not cause prolapse and be extended to the internal parts of the anus, making a fistula, or done in the term where it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for lancing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is ripe when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the reduction in swelling and pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that when you can perceive the perforation cauterized in the location just below the abscess and from pus coming from the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or feet, and at the location of the lacert, the cords of the nerves, the arteries; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to delay the perforation until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our saying; for if you perforate it before that, it will prolong the course of the pus and increase the hardness and depth of the lesion.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as the need dictates, or according to that from which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that for small abscesses, you perform a small perforation, and for large abscesses, a large and wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and cut, when this is done, do so quickly, as you would do in cases of tumors and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut with three angles in sections; and of those in which the incision is made as a figure of a mulberry leaf, as with abscesses of boils.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, those in which circular and crescent-shaped sections are administered, and resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More for those in which none is done as such, where the abscesses are superficial, ensure that you perform them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already gathered some healthy pus, that you perforate it and do not cut so as to drain all the poison at that time; having extracted a part, then raise the abscess on another day, and extract a larger part, and proceed to make punctures regularly according to degree until it is fully discharged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young man with virile virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy pus, and greatly weakens the disease, and you openly manage it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and in your perforation where you perforate these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer only a portion of li or coto antic; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are deep, then you should place your hand in each tract until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the cord or have concaved it in the circuit, then you should complete it with linen cloth or thread made of li fabric, just as when you have drawn out pieces or roots, considering their moisture; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from the ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if you happen to experience bleeding during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for several minutes.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must apply powders in wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which be mixed thoroughly by the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess and cleanse that area, and administer to its cure what is suitable for it until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said everything about the abscess regarding the method of its cure specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head, small abscesses, and their species of knots which contain tunics that are made thus; and the species of these are spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are pimples, and those that contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hardened, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should perform the extraction without causing any arterial obstruction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for the section of these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called a lancet, until you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what it contains is moisture, then section it along its length for a superficial section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of the line B between the line G. As the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and leave no cause of all, for too many times returns if there remains any cause of all.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then fill it and leave it for another day, for with this it dissolves all that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cross-like form, and make an incision between the two halves of the section, and thoroughly excise it from all parts, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the tunica which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the abscess that has been incised and is in the process of healing according to what we have said; the incision for an abscess that has been incised should be lighter, as it involves little bleeding and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people have no moisture at all; the cause is that I could not incise the abscess on a old woman's head and rubbed it with a hard, rough, white stone which could not be rubbed away, and if any did percuss it, it would be harmful.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As for the abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should drain the ears, but the incision for all these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the incision for those in the lower parts below, so that the healthy body fluid reaches the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to those things that are necessary for the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Swellings appear in these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the swellings that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is drained from its own membrane. Just as with nodes and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are swellings. Some are lumpy, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you perceive to be of good disposition according to the Touchstone, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the codenail, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not painful, you should incise it with a superficial dry cut from above the part down to the opposite side of the body along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it entirely, and extend the edges of the codenail with one cut, or with several small cuts if needed, just as we have said in the case of abscesses in the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is better caution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the incision not be too deep, so that it does not reach the point where you cannot easily withdraw your hand without cutting something or relieving pain, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and then stop your operation, then apply a vitriol trioxide or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave it so that the apostema is relieved and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the vein of the scrofulous swelling, avoid cutting that scrofulous swelling near the vein.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you place a strong fold there, let that one fall by itself if it can.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize them frequently enough to prevent any superfluous discharge.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, then you must incise the edge of it, extract it, and administer stitches as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears, and perform the perforation of what dries the pus beneath the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation, apply ointments and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is腐化 of the scrofula.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then treat it with a dressing of flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the section of the incision of the abscess in the groin area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section in the circumcision, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men with foreskin, a cut that should be avoided during the circumcision, for if it is not done properly all the veins and major arteries of the groin are at risk.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth, groin, or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the circumcision incision to avoid the danger caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then cut when we want that, for the paronychia, leave three or four small sections of the epilhoric tissue between two circles, so that the section is circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for the section, as it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are lacking.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, cut when he extends the thread of the forceps wide open, and then cut the thread before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cicatrix as we have recounted; and it is indicated on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that excised part and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two more loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is needed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the main point of the speech we have recounted is simply that you see some of those abscesses have already opened the wound in the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been cut. Some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh can breathe over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this command that the wound remain open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of it lasts for three days; and then when that time comes, I command thus the wound, and cure that where it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the thigh and incised there a part of the root of the lung, and I was called to the cure of her, and covered the wound as it gapes from the dead, and uncovered the wound and applied the sponge which was soaked like those used on the dead.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I must confess that there was no vein or artery cut, the wound is from the plague, and cured her with what was then considered a holy remedy.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any injury at all, not even hoarseness in her voice, and soon recovered from her illnesses.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the circumcision there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about the abscess that occurs on the shoulder and is called a shoulder hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, named shoulder hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental can occur in two ways: one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not allow the patient to make assumptions as if they were a physician only in matters concerning the small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that part and examine it as he is spoken of, and if you find a nodular mass, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that part as you would for nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursicle it; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place the area to be treated in such a way that it can heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of nodules there are various types, and I have already described all the types of these in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And ensure that you recount this difference between a nodule and an abscess so there is no doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the superfluity is subdued; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that cold lion which is in the back pocket.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a bruise and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of the node, express it and inquire about it at the beginning of the swelling which is called intromes, according to its form that will come in the chapter which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this swelling and insert that into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn the tissues little by little into that until you know that the swelling has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromes and consider what is situated in the residue.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I have said in other apothecary cases.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intruding vestige, then you know it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And it is dry on the surface having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, suspend it with threads, and completely remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac above it, if possible, and extract that flesh at the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that flesh. Instead, tie it off several times, and then extract it piece by piece to ensure it does not rupture for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it ruptures for any reason, either little or much, the knot should return according to the best method.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it ruptures any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is to be incised, and cure the rest according to the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not great, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which is within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with a third part of vitriol and leave it open for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood ceases; and then return to suture what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, of aluminum, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument penetrates into the abscess.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Albed, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of these three spices, one is major, half minor, and a little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced minor, its form is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced little, its form is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It should be applied to those abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes so that it is between them and the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And make them round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are attached. They can be made of iron, or steel, or silver, and they are best when made of steel citron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make experiences with black feathers, which are said to be effective when the fistulas in their cavities are opened and the reflections are reflected back due to their lightness.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so there are three species: some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the experiment with great lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of three species. Some are simple and have only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their bodies are needles, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those that have two curvatures are needles, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them they have three curves, and are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of single great curve, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of single moderate curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of single slight curve, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of great single curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of moderate great curve, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of slight moderate curve, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of great single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of moderate single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of slight single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of great single curve having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpel blades which are incised with nodes and apothecas, and they are of three species: one is large, woman, and few.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the woman scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The tips of those which are incised are sharp, while the other tips are not sharp, and they are not used in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done justly in the incision of the nodes to avoid cutting of veins or nerves, and for these purposes, the healing is good and there is some tranquility due to the heating which results from the excoriation of the apothecas.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of amigdalas, and they are of three species: large, woman, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great mangeur:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female disease:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of weak disease:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are caused by wind and resemble a ray from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if in the outer side it is punctured with a blade and inside it flows to the inner and outer parts, when you want, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatis, which are hidden between the fingers and do not cause pain in the patients, and are of three species: great, female, and weak.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of windy ones, in which the flow of wind is cut off, and they are of three species: great, female, and weak; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are caused by citrine wind, round of some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And ensure that these cups you use are large, medium, and few, so that through those incisions the flow of blood is rapid when needed, and when first made, they are not painful.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to bleed the entire body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as on the inner thighs and hips, on the breasts, the abdomen, the armpits, and similar fleshy crevices.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes small cups are made using those instruments, resembling scoops according to this form; through which blood is drawn when performed by phlebotomy, or from an incision in a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. liv.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be engorged, and at times the breasts of women swell and gather together, let us wager on them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who have this, cut out the affected area according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then excise all the tumor, fill the wound with red medicine, suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so, if the breast sags to the sides and becomes softened due to its size, as it often does in women, then cut it into two parts such that each part is contained within the other. According to this form, let the line of B contain the line of G. Then excise the tumor which lies between the two edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and powdering as necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it eats away the roots of the grease, and then cure what is left until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of carbuncles where the vein lets it tremble.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Such carbuncles where the vein lets it tremble are of the kinds of scrophula, hard swellings, which contain a pus that is drawn out.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, they must be incised at the lunar phase of seccio; according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the carbuncle of pus has been evacuated, then you complete it with new incisions and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cloth be left on and treated with suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is, then you incise there in the same manner as we have said in the section about scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming putrefactive, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have previously said.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow strikes and the chain is consolidated over that area, then dark spots will develop into an abscess. The signs by which one can recognize inflammation or an abscess due to an artery or a vein are as follows: when an abscess from an arrow is present, it extends lengthwise along the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the extraction of this abscess is an error, especially in those that are left under the armpits, in the groin, on the neck, and in other parts of the body; and if it is large, then one must ensure that its cure is not delayed, and that which is in the extremities or near the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, make the longitudinal section in the cord; and place the section with clips close to the artery, and free the tunics where it will be exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place the needle nearby and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which cause you to sew them carefully during the extraction of two arteries, which are located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And place the point where it is between two threads with forceps so that it seals the wound completely, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer care in which oil is applied until the threads dissolve; and cure it with suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the dryness of a vein, then you should have your hand where you can grasp the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle in the place you have grasped with your hand, making it penetrate; and take that from one side of the thread into the other, and tie the abscess well with good lint as I have said to you in the grapevine knot at both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the wax on the needle and thoroughly pierce the abscess in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle part so that when you sit on it, you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place yourself over the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to a twisted nerve.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is a percussion or excessive work on them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most frequent in the areas of the joints or the thigh, or in any location where the joints are lax.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body. It is located in the larger parts of his body. When stretched by inflammation, it feels like the patient is experiencing a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore, the chain is left off, and he is lax in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, what occurs in the joints is not caused by iron infiltration, for strong weight can induce contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More so, that which occurs in the head or in the forehead causes the chain to rust due to sweat.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then apply heat and cut it open with forceps.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and incise it, and stitch that part; and dress the wound until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek, which affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Often in some individuals, swellings are observed in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These swellings are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these swellings is subtle, but the head of the swelling is large. Moreover, the borders of these swellings are indistinct, and they can be either small or magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one myself, in the abdomen of which there were two swellings that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white areas, with their subtle root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already those lips were turned inside out and splitting, and moisture ran from there constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then incise those and puncture in the one foot at the eighteenth inch and the other at the sixth inch.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with fine particles; then incise at the space large enough, and have it in your presence cauterized in the fire, so that the section of the area should be expelled clean without pus; if you encounter pus, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the gout painful and terrifying, avoid incising with iron; instead, consider using fresh lead filings, strengthen that tissue, and the method of which we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, continue strengthening the lead gradually within the tissue until it is incised and falls out on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the thigh is of great thickness, when making the incision in it there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise the thickness of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure what is inside for the wound to heal.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to incise a thigh which is of dark color, with little sensation, and looks bad, for such a one is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come to remember the disease nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the cicatrix which is above the belly, and through it the membrane or intestine protrudes according to where it ends in other ruptures; or by a wound which flows from a vein or an artery as previously mentioned, or by congestion constricted within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a tear in the tissue and an exudate, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that area differs more significantly from what we have described. When you press on that area with your thumb, it becomes less obvious, and soon returns; it feels heavy in that place, and you should apply a strong bandage and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is due to moisture, then the pain is severe and does not become less obvious when you press on it with your hand; it is neither constricted nor relieved.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to a wound, then in this case the abscess appears blackish in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is due to nothing but flesh, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is severe.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in the operation, you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an artery, a vein, or congestion; and you must be careful about treating it, for there is fear and danger as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to lie on his side; and then pass a needle around the circumference of the navel, and command him to lie between your hands over his loins; and then circumscribe with soapstone all around the area you have marked with the needle; and extend the majority of the abscess upwards in one place; and put either a strong bandage or a cloth in that circuit in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the majority of the abscess over the bandage and insert your finger into that opening to feel for the intestine; and if you have already grasped it or secured it with the bandage, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine into the interior parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the fabric [of the hernia], then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that knot, and soon return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads, and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and soon strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, hold the needles and let the area between them dry and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can drain, and soon cure that with what oozes from the ointments as it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is from flesh neither in it nor by humidity, then drain what your cavity contains abscess as we have said and drain the pus or humidity which you find in it, and soon cure that with what oozes from the ointments to solidify the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol liiii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of pain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of types of pain and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that the cure is effective when the pain is not ulcerated; and we have said how pain is generated and cured.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some pains are in places where it is possible to completely eradicate them, such as headaches which are in the mammary glands or in the thighs and similar parts of the body, from which one should extract all of it, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is ancient and severe, I cannot say that it has proper properties, for I have not seen another like it nor one that can be treated in this way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for this is when it is located as we have said, that you first remove the disease and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if an obvious full accumulation is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which the incisions are made, and place probes in those places; and properly make a concave incision with the spoon so as not to damage any vital part of the body.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument you have at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find it necessary to make an incision for thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, and the cure for it using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of algitis alone, and it is not approximated to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypospadias, for this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of tympanic hydroptic condition with medicines and do not find your treatment effective, then consider whether if the patient has already achieved sufficient strength, or is at risk of another illness such as hydroptic disease, similar to those in their lungs or abdominal organs, then refrain from further intervention, for fear of harm.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you find the patient has an excess of vital virtue, and in him there is no other illness except hydroptic condition solely, neither child nor old man, then the way of the operation for him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and place your hand near his abdomen to express the fluid from him, push the water towards the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal tap according to this method:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts, long like a spinal needle; however, it should have some slight shortness gradually, so that in the operation you do not pierce into the intestine, and to avoid damaging it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider accordingly if the generation of hydroptic condition is from the intestines, for then you must separate from the navel by the length of three fingers to the lower parts, along the spine above the pelvis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydroptic conditions is due to illness of the liver, when your section is on the left side of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to fever, when your section is on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your section is not over the side where the illness is located, so that the superfluities do not flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then return the instrument along the entire length of the canal, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand above the spasm between the canal and the siphon, and you expel it; if the quantity is about one inch or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the siphon so that the spasm reaches the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; the end is incised in the manner of a feather, as you can see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the extremity of the patient, an overcoat is placed, for when the instrument reaches the water, then they often cry out on the instrument, so evacuate from the water in the half-hour quantity, for if you evacuate from there more than can fit in the hour, the patient will quickly die from resolution of his animal spirit, or accidents approach him that are near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the patient and according to how you interpret the disposition of the patient's virtue from his pulse and his overall condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, retain the water which causes it, for soon it is retained by the cord which pulls it from above. You are instructed to perforate there according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then reinsert the instrument on another day if you find the patient tolerating this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware not to become inflamed from the water but only slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and washing in bath water, and under the sun wait for long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the treatment of children whose passages for urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born with the abdomen of their mother not perforated (or it is opened straight or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, immediately after birth, perform the cauterization for the perforation of the child's abdomen using fine bath water according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a fine lead pin on it and bind it, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate he strains and does so; then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not heal this.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	More importantly, that which is drawn out should be treated with a lead wick, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	More importantly, those in which it is drawn out not from its place, the cause is known. That which is natural and caused by the wound should be treated at the end of the shaft of the penis so that he cannot urinate in the inner parts; while elevating the penis with his hand above the upper parts; this is not a generation issue, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to its correct path, and it is a chronic malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation for him is that the patient be placed on his back, then extend the shaft of the penis with your left hand with strong traction, and incise the head of the shaft at the site of the perforation with a sharp blade, like cutting a feather, or any part you deem necessary, so that the middle of the wound resembles the head of the penis and the drawn-out substance falls into the middle location.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And keep watch that in your operation for the flow of pus, whenever you see this occur; then place yourself at this point where you incise the pus, and treat the wound thoroughly until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol.lix.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the abscess which occurs in the prepuce and head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adherence of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Spots appear in this abscess on the penis and on the lagging flesh prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant: suspend it with a thin thread and incise it thoroughly until you cleanse it entirely; then place it over the area submerged in Egyptian ointment; subsequently, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a reddish color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should open the abscess that is inside at its beginning where it has formed; and afterwards treat the part that is outside, for when you treat the inside together with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have already spoken of accidents in the testicles and in the blackening and corruption of the foreskin; then you should cover all that which is degenerated and about to腐化或腐败；然后你应该覆盖所有已经退化或将要退化或已经腐败的部分，并在上面画一条线，使用一种含有陈紫草粉和细筛过的粉末的麻油。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat the other part while it is healing.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of pus, then apply a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	But the lunar cautery is applied in two positions together, either when there is a flow of pus and during an outbreak when it has become corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the disease urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce, at its head (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce comes off, and upon which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to inflammation or abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument until the adhesive is dissolved and the head of the penis is delivered entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the penis and the prepuce, and this is where the prepuce, when thin and light, is perforated slightly by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a thin probe, which has already been moistened in the fomenting liquid to prevent them from adhering again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And it should be treated by applying astringents after it has consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as are other wounds: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of the others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to that the better operation and the lighter way, losing none to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not speak of circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who practice circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use lint with honey and incisions with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and found that the best purification is with flax, with lint with honey, rather than in purification with oil. For you often find the chain breaking above, for the chain of the prepuce has two tunics, and the inner tunic remains loose, and it is forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And for the cleansing which is done by scrubbing, and is digital, of which cobblers use it, it is not secure for the insertion of the extremity of the male member, because strong it enters into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, may I have strength, firmly use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and is often handled in such a manner that it does not require cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	May the cleansing that is done with scissors and threads of hemp, be good, as experience has described to me, for the scissors have proportional insertion, thus the acuity that is above is such as the acuity that is left; and therefore, when you press your hand so proportionally on two acuities, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the hemp juice in a figure containing the cord of the virginal organ from all parts, upon which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie still, especially if it is one that can understand a little, and do not let him move at all. You should hold the hemp juice on his virginal organ only, and leave it there for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that person feel better in all that manner that is within your capability for what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place that person among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred steps away; hide the scissors in your hand or let them hold your arm, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the genitals and blow into the scrotum, and insert that which will lift the head of the penis, and then modify that which is attached to it due to deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then fold the place marked with excrement, and then ligate a little below that with a small thread, and then have your finger on the location of the thread to maintain good tension, and incise between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the scrotum slightly and tear the head of the penis; and then let the bleeding proceed slowly, for that is better; place powder above and on top of the powder, put a cloth impregnated with honey cooked in olive oil recently pressed over it; leave that there until the next day; treat that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the pincers after modification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the fingers are uncut and the others are cut, then place the branch of the key, and let the length of the two acuitats be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, in the modification, if you let the intrinsic chain escape entirely or partially, you must make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So make sure that you stretch that one with your thumb in front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then grasp it with the tip of your finger and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More importantly, if more than three days have passed, and the swelling remains with the sore apstematized, then you let it be until the abscess is drained, and extract that with ease, and make the incision according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the opening of the vagina, for that would not be good for her.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure that which the plague of the powders consolidates, as we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it incides from the chain beyond measure, and you obey the articles above, this will not harm her.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which we have said must be cured first.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an accumulation due to a stone, or a sore ulcerated wound, or pus or flesh. It resembles those we have mentioned in our treatise on the methods of treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then make the patient bend over their own thighs.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on the seat and extend his back from the part above his seat, and the patient straighten his legs as much as it is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is sewn there is expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, so that urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said before, strongly make the cause known to the patient, then cut open the stone with a surgical instrument which is called a forceps, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be slender like a long ray similar in length to half a palm, at whose head it should have a fine point.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of urinary evacuation through it is that you take the string doubled and tie it at the end with good knots; and insert the ends of the string into the opening where the forceps were, and cut with scissors if any part of the wool is superfluous. Then strongly insert it into the canula, and closely close the forceps with wax.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cut in the patient's side, and apply oil and olive oil to the bladder and groin.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the probe to facilitate its passage to the opening of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the point of insertion; and then push the probe inside; and then push that inside so it reaches the bladder, and that towards the patient's side being guided to the source of the problem, and if this is not done in this order, but the meat where it is twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pull out the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and apply a cure for urine, use the probe, continue doing this until the bladder and patient are fully relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol.lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with probes and using similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burning sore there, or it is constricted by swelling, and you wish to distill water and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that in the extremity of it there is no sensation, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three incisions: two from one side, thus many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, in which that which is pushed in is located, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, what remains is also drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to how it forms the clampcedra, on which naphta is placed in the battlements of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, when you want to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed to the upper parts; for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end part of the cedar stick into the urethra as we have advised in surgery; and then push the moisture out as you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the disease will center there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the thread inside cotton.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder and place the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder. Then tie it tightly with a double thread of linen, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand on the bladder as you push the moisture downwards, so that the disease centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that circle completely round; then insert strong thread through all those stitches as they are turned; then place the circle in such a way as it is placed alsofatur, after which you place what you want from the humidities, smell, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you attach that to the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and place your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol.lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of gallstones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of gallstone and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between a gallstone formed in the gallbladder and one formed in the bladder, as well as the signs of it.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the gallstone for which major operation and sectioning are performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I now narrate that matter in the exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of it are that the urine voided from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its joint, motley veined pain, and is often dressed; and for this the buttocks are affected among those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and the cure is difficult in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in young people, it heals through that which is between them, namely the kidney.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which is greater in the stone and the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, begin with the modification of gout by applying a plaster which exerts all its force on the hole which is in their intestines; for that hole sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone by investigating it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient's feet and make them stretch and flex their legs so that the foot descends to the neck of the bladder, or so that they urinate several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place those cushions you have prepared under your hands, while the other servants keep their positions, so that the bladder is made to slope towards the sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply it to that and all that region.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly apply pressure to the area.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the stone does not pass completely with your touch, then rub your little finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And apply pressure to the stone with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the outer parts. Look for the location from which it comes.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand retract the codena which is placed under the genitals, at the location where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatium; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the lateral part of the left thigh; and let the section be on that bone which you said is in the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone be as possible, and no more. For when the bone is in the anus, you should make the section, and it is a perforated wound with its capacity.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And be aware that from the foot there is some angle and margins, because the movement of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which seems like a lion's claw, and is round, and is made of it easy movement.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus cut out, then you must probe it or strengthen it with caution, ensuring that the extremity of which is like a file over which you strengthen the foot, and does not slip from it; or you must insert a thin, curved instrument under it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge the wound a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it with a strong instrument using vitriol triphasate.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the foot has more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut around it; and then push a little there; similarly do if its marks are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance would have you cut out that great section, for which happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or manages to cause a continuous urinary discharge, for which reason the area is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is outside, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract it from the pus.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place the soaked cloth over that area with oil and wine, or with diluted oil and vinegar, to ensure that the abscess yields.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lift the patient's leg above their heart, and do not apply the bandage on the seventh day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, soak the area in water and much oil, and then cure it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound you find an abscess, adjust and corrode it, and it appears as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and through it urine is prohibited (and this is known by the excretion of blood with the urine), then introduce your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if Roman corrosive causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all kinds of herbs, using what is suitable for its cure until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And attend to the hours of the entire cure that you have prepared between the thighs and apply the medicines which are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine discharge is prohibited, then treat it by applying what I have recommended before reaching the stage of desiccation; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing desiccation. Now I will describe this, which is that you use a metal probe, the shape of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the foot.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and tie it around the swelling, let the leg rest so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the swelling, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach that leg.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the puncturer with your hand in that leg little by little, and you complete the puncture where you have started; so that urine is quickly released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken from the leg near the swelling, for that is cracked, and the hole is filled with urine; thus the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not applied to your apparatus for any reason that prohibits it, then tie honey around the leg, and another piece of honey above the leg.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then place something warm over the leg in that swelling between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and modify the wet dressing, which is done on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And you do not need to use silk bandage on the heel, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Instead, place another bandage above, for when the bile is released near the edge of the heel, the cord returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you apply the bile above, you must raise the cord to the parts above, or it will return and heal the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol.lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of heel warts in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Wart in women is less commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if a wart does appear on any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman who is carried is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a woman well versed who will tell whether she has been with the doctor when she is chaste, or if she has been with other women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman well versed in this art, especially in major operations.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section near the heel in women is far from the actual heel, so you need a wide incision, and there is danger in that area.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to do this, then you must seek out an experienced pregnant woman, and few are found who fit the bill.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are lacking in that, then seek out an experienced and subtle doctor, or present an elderly woman skilled in women's affairs, or a woman who is part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then put her finger into the woman's vagina to feel the heel.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing his left hand on the bladder, and compress that area with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then lie on that application of the strength of the wound. Place the root of the thigh from any part where it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not moistened by the stone, cut him off.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if the stone is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the seeds of the pear are grains: some are small and large, lion and bitter, long and round, and having points.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know how many seeds the pear has so that you can signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol trioxide to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation once the pear has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare among your instruments those you mentioned in the extraction of pears from men, so that you can be helped by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood comes from the artery that is incised, then sprinkle powder over the area and strengthen it with powders to cause a downward contraction, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not remove it, for a strong ligature will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the pain in the foot subsides after several days, and the place has healed, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquoea is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white fiber which is the channel of the genital veins containing the blood. It is called a phyma.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the very fabric itself, which nature prepares in the part of the blood, before it is cooked and another blood is present; and this is the channel of the genital vein, which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genital veins, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to a strike applied to the genital area.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having various colors, its color may be yellowish, or bloody, or red, or black and floury, or watery white, and it is this that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this water addition is located are these: if it is in the white cell as we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an ovary, and the genus becomes apparent, for the moisture contained from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round, departing from the ovary, and for this reason one estimates that it is another ovary.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the region of the genus and the white cell, then cut away the centiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the moisture, you should probe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a medium cut from which its form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the medium, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure of it, you should command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he is laid face up on some bed for a short time, and place his body under the coverings.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then seat yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to stand on his right side, who extends his cloth over one of the sides at the base of the thighs and the part of the miracle of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the base of the thighs in the middle location along the length near the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to the correct distance from the line where you divide the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white muscle layer.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe it, and keep it for this: you must not go inside that; your excision of which you have excised by part should be suspended on the finest hook and examine it carefully according to the quantity you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the muscle full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the incision upwards; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the incision in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin layer, for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you proceed with that from the outside of its chain during the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the incision, return inside that, and properly adjust the two lips of the genitalia's chain with sutures, and properly care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the vein, and properly care for that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according to how you have done in the other equally; and if it is clear to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, interlaying in sections wool submerged in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over which you have submerged it in wine and oil, spreading that over two genitals and the marvel of the belly; and place over cloths folded and powders, and lay those over bran which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fill them with well-carded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the garter of the trousers, one end grasping the buttocks between the two, and the other grasp at the crotch part, and two ends leave for the thighs, and two other ends on the ankles, and all the structure be tied in the garter of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of iron; and you grasp a subtle surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitals, and it is ignited as we have advised until the white chorde containing the water is revealed, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then lance the blister with needles, and excoriate it with needles, and cauterize it with a细针点燃的火 BRAND; and incise that part according as it is possible, so as to eradicate all of it; and guard the oil from which the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sections.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find any contrary condition, apply a blister either at the time of sectioning or at the time of cauterization, or during the flow of blood. Then treat that contrary condition as you would any other, applying the appropriate cure as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I shall recommend. And when you are certified by what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you must sit the patient on some elevated cushion, then puncture the abscess at the lower part of it with a lancet, and pause the puncturing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the area carefully, press there and then release, to allow the water to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And place something over the area where the wound is to be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the discharge of the water at that time you puncture there: and this is not done except because the white lint causes a contrary effect and prohibits the emission of water. When you must put into the wound a pledget or instrument from which water is drawn from the dropsy, the form of which precedes; or apply a small ligature to the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and is agueguada (purged) for about six months or until it is gone; and when it is purged, then puncture according to that method, so that the gout thus passes its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of harm to the major organs; for I have seen its relief and been saved by the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses natzi (a type of localized infection) in the tissues where the glands are composed occur for these reasons: either due to acute superfluous heat, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not prominent in it; this is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess that has formed is dark in color, and there is no throbbing pain in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the obstruction of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels, as the memory of which is already perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, which is due to the inflation of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when you compress those ties said; and note that you should not touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, which is caused by the inflation of veins, does not disperse it for any reason you should compress with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that a section may be made on this kind and on other meats; for you must incise the cord of the testicles, then extend the scrotum upwards, extract the one from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the veins, ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the scrotum has already adhered to the surrounding tissues and consolidated, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to some cause in the cyst, or between what is between the veins, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is native flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind, then scrape out all that belongs to it, and remove the pus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol. lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is external.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an apostema enveloped by some envelope resembling a sprout due to the softening of the testicles, and it makes physical exercise, exertion, and movement difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is fear of what preceded it and caused it to occur.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, let us say that an operation should be performed there according to how we described the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should cut out the illness on an elevated piece of cloth; and place the suspensory ligament of the testicles over the parts left; and have the codena of the inguinal region on your thumbs, which are tried by the forceps; and have another minister with you, and extend those with a strong pull.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise the tough membrane longitudinally by transverse section in the middle between the vessels that are now exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which is thread double, and tie that at the first location where you make your cut, and tie the other end at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location by a longitudinal section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you want healing to be generated so that the vessels which are not affected by either genius are left intact, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you make your cut in all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they atrophy due to the incision of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the vessels, and that they become established, or that they wither away on their own.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm covering the abdomen from the pelvic bones. Because of this rupture in the membrane, some of the intestines protrude.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision. This happens to these two species due to various causes: perhaps a blow, or by jumping, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy cause, or by a similar action.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that enters the chest through the membrane because the diaphragm contains the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to separation of the diaphragm, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the surrounding area. This is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body's reaction in the parts outside the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine or the tissue is pushed out through the fabric, and this hernia is called intestinal carbuncle.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is suspected that the cure should avoid the spread to that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if it obeys on its return, and then fix them over their shoulder between your hands, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which connects the cord of the testicles upwards, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then place two fingers at the cleft section according to where you need to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to let of the humor should be evacuated.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then strip the thigh where you have left the cord of the testicles, while the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your thumb in what is seared of the testicle, in what is between the white cord, which has the cord of the humor, and between the cord later, and release any adhesion that is in the part behind the humor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the cord of the testicles in the forward parts, and by this stretch the white cord with your left hand, and elevate the humor towards the cord to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek around the thumbs that they know that there is no cause for the intestine enveloped in the white cord.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then peel that away and leave it on the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of thick wire, and place it at the base of the scrotum, which is located below the testicles, in a dry section; and then incise the ends of the wires that protrude from the needle into four wires, and place some of them on a cross-shaped figure; and hold those with the scrotal base tightly in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the wires and hold them tightly with strong thread so that none of the vessels nourishing those ends can transmit any cause by which an abscess might occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another layer of thread according to the size of the first thread, keeping it about three fingers' length away; and with these two threads, leave the scrotal base which is located below the testicles the size of a finger's width, and incise the rest according to the roundness, and cover it with skin.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part below the scrotum along a section from which fluid and pus flow as we have recounted in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the lint we have mentioned (and several times the white chalk is seared, which we have already said near the incision of their fear of a flow of blood, because often this happens) and leave the lint inside so that it may fall by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the application is delayed, then pour cold water on it, and place it there until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with another treatment for wounds as it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol. lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of hernia ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that was burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done as we have mentioned in the hernia that is open; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over which there is a facilitation of it; and after tying, dry thoroughly in the middle area by applying an apostema with what I am doing there, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and apply ointment to the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the surgeons do not attribute any cause of the ruptures to the intestines; and if they do, it is rare; and return them in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, there is an appropriate crack in the cavity where we place the intestine; and this accident occurs due to the extension of the cavity, which is in the ankles as we have said, the cause being that the cavity is stretched, and then softened, and the area becomes suppurated, and apply ointment.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as described in the preceding account.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by applying iron according to this manner: and that the patient lies on his side between your legs, and then the place of the rupture of the pustules dries up and exudes fluid according to the width as per the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white ointment that is at the wound once it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the wick and place it over the area where the ointment is exuding, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then tie the two exuding areas over the end of the wick of the ointment, and adjust one to another with the缝合线。
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go beyond the ointment pouch entirely, nor extend the thread, nor any other cause such as I have faith in for the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the edges, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the ointment contracts and does not adjust the exuding edge of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more closely related to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXXXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When spots appear on the scrotal skin in some men, the skin is mollified because the flesh between there is also mollified, and attention should be paid to this.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is in charge of the treatment to ensure that the patient lies in such a way as to facilitate the healing, and completely expose the scrotal area that is mollified over the natural scrotum; and then carefully bring the two lips together at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, make three or four initial stitches in the excess of the mollified scrotal area and then perform a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches; and after curing other wounds, allow the threads to dissolve.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol lxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is told to me that I should remember it in this book; and the recall of this is not necessary for two reasons, one of which is that when a doctor is questioned about it, he knows the cure for whom it happens. The other reason is that we must sometimes have castration of other beasts for our cattle, such as bulls, boars, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus say that castration is done in two ways: either by atrisssion or by a sectional incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by atrisssion, the way of the operation is that we cut the beast in water so that the genitals of the beast are softened and relaxed while they hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand so that they are relaxed and no marks appear upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration performed due to fissure and secution, ensure that you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory, and incise over each groove between two testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those pus that you have from each excoriation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but the fine incision which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction strongly leaves no cause of the testicles because the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Capitulum LX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where a gap appears in the cord of the testicles, in which there is a figure resembling a female between the two testicles.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that cord in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the woman's mons pubis is like two testicles of a man slightly swollen on the outer part like the scrotum of a man with its two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should incise those tight muscles where the fluid escapes from that area, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the cord of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is needed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On lymph nodes and swellings in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lymph nodes that are firm and tight are due to natural causes where they are compressed and appear noticeable; sometimes in women, they are enlarged to such an extent that they expand like in men, and can be felt during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then hold the superfluous phlegm in your hand or cupped hand and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not insert it too deeply, especially in the region of the rectum, so that no flux of sand occurs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then attend to that for the cure of the wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that does not appear in the horror of the womb until it fills that space; and a large cyst is situated near the parts external according to the likeness of a cocoon (and for this some first called it "caudate illness"); therefore, handle it as we would cut phlegm, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hernia is when the wall of the woman's womb is perforated, or is torn slightly.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accident occurs due to a malfunctioning condition that has preceded, and that is caused by meat not fitting well or by a subtle or thick chip.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the region of the uterus, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit coitus and impregnation and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made through the examination of the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, promptly; but if it is not obvious, then you seek that area with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a subtle chip, and is near the two lips, then you probe and dislodge that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating both hands in front of them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force while that subtle chip is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised area from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the ulcer is large and deep, then you must incise it with a spatula or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the ulcer is superficial, then suspend it with a wick, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as vervain, dragon's blood, and garlic, prepared with honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from becoming only slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for a few days and administer weak wine.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then use the other consolidation remedy while it is healing.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the predominant state of other tissues, then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to a chronic abscess, in the chronic abscess which is in the major part do not make any counter-irritation in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the cure of hemorrhoids and prolapse and of red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins around which constantly circulate drops of blood; and as for ancient hemorrhoids, they are formed into cords.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and cords when in the prolapse of the major part and do not appear in sensation, then in those do not make any cure.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the major part on which there is sensation, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And make sure you place the woman in a lying position and extend her thighs, either with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise there where the roots are.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those incisions the flux of the juice from one of the inscissive powders several times with a mouth, as if you were speaking or looking at those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the soles of his feet for an hour, and then cool that with cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make that incision in a decoction of sumac and of scours of millet grains and of ginger and of appearance.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ochre and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it with two vetches, and make six incisions on the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of horehound with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this not be of harsh regard, but that you insert what appears to you as I have said in the same manner.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the vein in the thigh.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various specific forms of apothem (a type of abscess) occur in the thigh, such as carbuncle, apothema lapident, ulcer, adhubelat, erpetromens, fistulas emoryas, raguarrias, thyly, and other apothemas.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and their specific forms, as well as the signs of these conditions, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And ensure that I mention in this treatise on apothem to cut the one that appears in the thigh among those apothems that heal well, and if you want to know how the operation is performed, I will tell you in what manner.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain in the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that it turns red and if it feels like a perforation inside, and treat it with what helps towards maturity until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should place the woman on a bench that has two benches; recline her on her side and adjust her feet to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms beneath her armpits, with her hands resting on her sides.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the vein straight and administer the instrument through the openings of the uterus, the form of which will come in the cases that will be discussed soon.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the uterus, and what part of the instrument enters the uterus should not exceed the length of the uterus and expel the disease.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the size of the sore, then cover it with powder over the sore's size so that no part of the instrument enters the sore.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover it so that the fluid that flows in the needle passes above and that the minister holds the needle and rotates the fluid within until the openings of the sore are open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that part by cooling its head with spittle.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then cover the wound with a cloth submerged in slightly pressed oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the paste in the area around the sore.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the sore and over the foot with clean wool submerged in water in which vervain is boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured in about two days by applying ointment which suits the wound until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed and tried with chrismated water and honey, then with water in which is stirred rye or barley flour, and then returned to ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the liver softened, then covet that you be prohibited from treating it with iron, but take care that you do as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol.lix.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat false labors according to an unnatural figure or condition.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs. When you see the female strain at the openings and desire to smell the air, and because of this she is flushed with what is over her during labor, and hastens the onset of false labor, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the onset of the child upon her head. The second one is either above or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then cover the abdomen so that the fetus descends gently; when it is on its head, turn it to the second position, and this is cleansed of those superfluities by good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus lies on its feet, the body of the fetus is before the head of the fetus and its feet, and one of its hands, or at its side, or the head of the fetus, and one of its hands, or at its belly, and strongly it is turned over its own back, and resembling the figures of such things is unacceptable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For necessary cause the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those, and what engine is in those so that it is signified by this and is placed upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus lies on its head by natural position, and it is strong upon the woman and made into a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of labor has already weakened, then do that section, or what women have for labor, and evaporate the pain with fenugreek seed and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the needle between his so-called small spines and split it at that second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which flows what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen so that it descends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be anointed with almond oil and fennel oil.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, the cristaria, to be wrapped and make her sneeze by her condition; and keep her mouth and her nose closed for one hour, until the fetus comes out.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus have come out at the beginning, then cause her to deliver them gradually with facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet off it, and hold the cushion over the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside and the cut is deep, then incise there and extract the fragment of the cut or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be thoroughly cleaned.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the cut is over its feet, then push those parts into it, and soon make the cut smaller, and soon take one foot and extend those parts little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it is sewn between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that drain by condition, for that will be thoroughly cleaned if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not thoroughly cleaned by what we have recommended, then return the cut little by little into place as you pause it according to the natural figure, for that will be thoroughly cleaned by a slight stitch.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden by all that we have recommended, then take of fine alum and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar for good pounding, and then mix with it the urine of a woman, below the navel.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cut in clear water, when you can reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts around him are numbed, then perform a fumigation with myrtle on him and place your hand over it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make a cut on it, and expose the mouth of the wound, and lift it, and apply a gentle compression to the part below the abdomen, which will soon become firm.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Press the wound against his flanks and his sides.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound heals in this manner, then gradually insert his smaller fingers; and place the woman lying on her back, with her feet elevated, and those fingers resting on the wound, completing the insertion of her fingers.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on his abdomen, and when the feet are ready to be placed in the auricles, then extract what is left of the feet from the ears.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not yet closed, then take the feet and move them with vigorous movement, and gradually press what is on the hypochondria towards the parts above as the wound heals.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and close the wound little by little, and command the woman to express herself as the wound heals.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her urinate.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot urinate, then apply a jalaz on the lyte, and shake the patient's thighs with a violent concussion, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then apply a cerclage with sutures, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to bear it as the wound heals.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the leg over the neck and spread the patient's hands while stretching the foot.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife hold the foot and gently rotate it little by little, so that it becomes more comfortable.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and comfortable, then place there oil and ointments as we have recommended.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be gently moistened little by little, and when you have done this, place the cloth on a basin and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be warm. Make the cloth steamy with heat.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus has exited and is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother experiences severe pain in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then incise the third layer, so that it is not retained and causes harm.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you have placed that one according to what fits, and order the woman to strain herself several times, and the rest be softly expelled by effusion, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of two infants or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin spots of many births are natural, and sometimes they give birth to three or four at once, but this is strange and hard to determine. Yet these causes are from nature, not from illness.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiple or a single second birth, and they are separated by cipha (a type of bandage). They distinguish between the ligament at the navel of each. Sometimes they are softly expelled in several births as if it were a fetus by natural effusion, and some remain for several births as if by an unyielding effusion, as we have reported.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult, some of them you should deliver the fetus and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all form as prepared by her leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some pregnancies are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more up to ten. You must verify that a female who aborts has carried one, another with six entirely formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife that she must know well about it, and therefore place her hand upon it so that it is proper.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery if necessary. You should consider whether the woman is in good health and not affected by any of the conditions for which her life is feared to be in danger.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is laid on her back with her head inclined sideways and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tied on the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then apply to the mouth of the patient some sweet-smelling oil and oil of almond and fenugreek and sesame.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and ointments, and place her hand with ease in the patient's mouth, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers should be placed on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to be born by placing your fingers at its temples, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or palate, or leave the beard area, or on the furrow of the chest, or on the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the thumb with your right hand, curve it at that location which is between the fingers of your left hand, insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have mentioned, until you reach the root cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and hold the other thumb, or the third if necessary, so that it is in equal opposition, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And gently move it in all directions, so that the tension of the tooth is relieved as is done in dental extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And hold it in such a way that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then have the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate around the part that is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the flesh is forgotten, then the nails may grow into that place; and do this while all the flesh is retracted.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and then extract it while all of it is retracted, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or in its side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the flesh is large, or you encounter constriction during incision, or it is in the head with accumulated water, then you must insert sponge-tipped forceps between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or use a scoop-like instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the flesh has a large head by nature: then you must incise it with a hooked knife, or use an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should lift the sternum, then cut where the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is convenient for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the swelling of the abdomen is suppurated or in edema, then you should perforate it where the humidity that is in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the abscess is on their feet, then the draw of it is light and its direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and feet, then you should extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where what is within flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are swollen and return to normal, then the surgeon should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then she should insert her hand in the prehensor of layre, and seek for the head, and pull that with the fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two uncia, and pull them with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the main vein is narrowed by an abscess, when it happens to someone, then ensure it is not twisted; first, ensure that you administer effusion of fatty humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the side, then if possible, punctuate it: and administer what we have said about the living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise it in pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by an abscess in the main vein.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply compresses with astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead child is no longer present.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess in the inguinal region; and when opened, it is filled with pus, and begins to discharge blood.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal completely.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied plaster with strong adhesive properties over it, and set one splint, and after some days, set another splint; and I was greatly amazed, for in the thigh there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead child.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, the child existing in her uterine conditions, and having witnessed such a manner for a long time, I corrected part of the arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician uses his hand for in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the ligaments, at which equalization there are two vertigines at the ends of two fuci.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But let this vertigine be hollow and more delicate in structure, and made of hemp or of young fuci.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each fust be as wide as two fingers, and the edge on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; in the middle location of two fuci, there are two joints of that same type of fust, which are already firmly set, with each having a length of about a palm and a little more, and a width as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional items be inserted into the mouth of the womb so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that, both subtle and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of wood or bone according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Moreover, at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of those pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the womb before the midwife does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the virtue which the ancients would say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of support in which the large head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like extraction forceps from which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of support simple:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which has closing teeth such that the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities such that the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of such are multiplied, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more of them due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, then wait until you command the patient to bear down, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this it comes forth, well done.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a probe and perforate in the covering a tract and place it over the burning herbs to cover the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anethum, camomile, scikatsis Arabic, and cinnamon.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the probe, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing exercise as we have said before, and the second one should be done quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this remedy is not effective, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or poppyseed oil, and then insert that into the wound and seek out the second one, as you have found it, and take it out gradually. If it adheres to the mother's hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little according to correctness so that the mother does not fall due to the force.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Place the wound on the back and front with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and application of a paste with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not all the causes which we have recounted are outside your mind in a state of abstraction, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue it repeatedly. Rather, apply ointment and tetra-pharmaka to the area near the opening of the large intestine in the woman's thigh, and consecrate it with oil; for this will cause the affected area to dissolve and be expelled within a few days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it flows out, it rises to the head and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; then you should administer fumigations and appropriate remedies for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Then some of the Ancients prescribed fumigations with nettles and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Forma of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated, you should retain her menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or earthenware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the thin end in the cohere and the wide end over the fire, and position the fumigation over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while the sub-fumigation is consumed and they repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the child cries and its anus is not perforated, which have already been treated with a fine and rolled bandage.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her own said bandage; and if not, perforate it with a sharp instrument, and take care that it does not touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place it over the area infused with wine and oil; and cure that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it is constricted, then place a cannula for several days; and wait until the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if constriction of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and cure it with what we have said about the treatment and the lancet.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occasion openings.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occasion openings proceed from a decay and coarseness of those parts, which occur near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or a ulcer.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that decay is old and comes from watery white moisture or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what occurs from them through the outflow and through windiness; sometimes the patient suffers from the outflow, and strongly is affected by those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the base of the foot.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to know whether a fistula penetrates into the buttocks or does not penetrate, you should insert your finger into the buttock and gently probe with a thin reed or iron in the fistula when there is no pus.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is a tumor, then insert into that fine cavity either lead or horse skin, which you feel in your hand.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and proceed from no cause of passage or worm or tumor, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrant, and then apply a cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then its significance is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof until the area has been medically consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrant into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then its sign is that the tumor pervades here if there is no tumor in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the affected area; and that from it there is constant swelling; and that it does not respond to that medical treatment, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrant fistulas, there is not a complete cure, and the cure of these is hard work and the diligence of the medical leaves upon which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already healed and protracted.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his side with his knees bent, the thighs inclined toward the abdomen, and a lead or iron catheter inserted into the fistula if it is tortuous, so that you can feel where the catheter passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert the thumb on this side into the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the catheter already by itself clearly penetrating in your thumb, or something between your thumb and the sore or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing is not there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it is healed in some men after a while.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which healing is hoped for, you should heat a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you can feel that all those diseased tissues around the fistula are firmly adhered, resembling the feathers of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that which is full of veins wrapped around where all those muscles adhere, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and otherwise, when not healed in some time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the cord enters but does not penetrate inside, you have said which is in the buttock, and between that and the cord which is a veil of flesh or cicatrix, and cauterize the fistula in what dries the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you should cauterize the cord, and let it be inside the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the cord passes, and through the cord it is released and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are similar to the canal of an eagle's penis and do not drain from any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flux of pus comes between you and the operation when examining those muscles, then let that which is worse be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine. For cauterization with fire adjusts well to two habitual uses: it is the adjustment of those muscles, and the removal of pus by the drying effect of the heat.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is with cold veins wrapped in bandages or cut through inside the area getting warm, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh generated and consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in medicines in which there is stiffness and excoriation; when restored, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula already penetrates to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the wound is touched and between you and her there is a membrane of cicatriz or of flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but rather according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or excise that until you achieve the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with a severe excision so that you do not penetrate the muscle containing the channel, and act according to the will of the patient; then cure it as we have said which will surely be healed; or lengthen that membrane and clean that until you make it dry near the buttock, as we have said, or by touch or by another pointed instrument, and then modify those fistula-curved flesh sections which are in the region where you can apply cauterization; and then strive to complete the restoration of the entire wound by excision, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula at the part of the buttock, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cleft of the buttocks near the surface of the body with the codena and at the margin of the buttocks, then take hold of a perforated extremity, as if piercing needles are prepared according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it there, wrapping it in several threads or around them; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates to the margin of the buttocks inside, then you extract the thread from that, holding it as you insert your hand into the buttock; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthening each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the tissue can be cut, strengthen well that part where the tissues between the two ends of the thread are cut.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way prepared, but ensure it is moist on the inside so that you do not injure the tissue; then place something within to promote healing.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the pointed probe for which the fistula is punctured: one part is curved sharply while the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, just as you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be classified into two ways: one where they appear like coals in the anus, or those that resemble raisin seeds.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, they can be small and large, with pain occurring at different times and being constant, with marks, and outside the anus, in the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are external to the anus are according to the degree of less humidity, from which yellow urine or a little of constant bloody discharge occurs, and are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the abdomen is to command the patient to lie down and express himself while the abdomen swells and the hemorrhoids appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit down and place your hands under his arms, and quickly apply those that you have at your disposal.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hands are not at your disposal because of their moisture and softness, then take those made of rough cloth or hard or woolen flax, and apply them to the thighs called tibias, and quickly incise them and sprinkle some powdered snake root over them, so that they serve as a cauterization; or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with the other method until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then insert a probe into the patient's rectum and have it dipped in the liquid that is in the abdomen and which will gently pass out when the patient strains.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you should grasp them with your finger or with forceps, introduce them, and afterwards cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have an incision, ensure that you suture it according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, then make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread in the remaining part below the needle, securing it laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong structure, then knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a soaked cloth in oil or ointment over the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which is inside remain; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or other cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Injuries that occur due to the widening of a crack or due to natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since these are old and not effective in medicine, you should scratch them with the point of a needle or with your fingernail until they become moist, and then cover them with a piece of cloth from the other side, which prevents their healing; and then treat those that have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you scrape them with a sharp blade more vigorously than the first time while they are bleeding and are excoriated; and then treat those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of abscesses, this is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not something else but a round swelling resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and because of these pains you should remove it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then ensure that what is in the circuit of the key is cut out, and held with forceps or tongs, and eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More often than warts, which are small rough rounded fistulas protruding on the surface of the body, and veins visible in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and cut out that part, or to narrow it with a needle or with thread that fits.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated both ways and counterways with the instrument which you will specify.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More often a formica (likely referring to a pimple or small boil) is a small fibrous or fistulated prominence on the surface of the body, preceded by pain in the area. When you touch it, it feels like a bite from an ant, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for this is that you take a strong awl or cautery needle and place it over the blister between which you contain the circle of the needle from the parts of the patient; then turn your hand around the needle as you insert what is within the circuit of the blister, and leave it in the projection of the flesh, and eradicate the blister by its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with an awl or iron needle according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Draw the upper part of the needle taut, slightly dull (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the hand is blinded and the revolution of that [needle] is hidden.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described in the cauterization of athylos at the top of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments you use to give cristari.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cristari is made of silver or tin or forged iron or hammered iron; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you use, for the one used in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cristari of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of pressing great and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the catheter in which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinct place where the bag is tied as you can see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the bottom end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, becoming finer towards the tip; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, with the width of the opening according to the size of the rays and larger ones slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with several openings as it is twisted; and the spacing between the openings should be about the width of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert strong raw honey into those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or surrounding them; adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed in it, make the catheter straight at the top between two distinct points with firm constriction, and then press each opening: More importantly, the quality of pressing each opening should be such that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is resupined on their back, elevates their legs, and places them on a cushion; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek or similar to the tip of the cautery; introduces it into the anus with ease, and the minister takes the bag and expresses it twice with vigor so that everything in the crista is evacuated into the intestine; then removes the crista and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to evacuate, have it as much as it can; and if one sleeps all through the night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you perform an incision on the abdomen for the solution of the stomach and the evacuation of the wound, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine and sharp incision, among the incisions that children are accustomed to.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what pertains to the free and with medicines according to the need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to where they are caused and according to the area on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a sword cut or a dagger, or a lance strike, or a rod, or an arrow, or similar to those caused by such impacts.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More specifically, the wounds in the parts of the body are thus: like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, or similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some wounds because you apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will start with simple head ailments, for the recall of compound cases will come at the beginning of the third book.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when an injury occurs in the head with a simple wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and has already shattered the skull slightly only and is a large wound and you fear an evil development into an abscess, then you should probe and bleed the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract from there as much blood as the power of the wound allows, provided no other reason prevents bleeding, especially if the blood that issues from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bleeding is from the opposite side of the injured wound; and one must guard against filling, and eating, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause forbids reduction, then lessen the food but do not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the wound, if an abscess develops, apply heat with olive oil or with wine in which astringents are dissolved.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that place, apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed that place, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or due to a cut and the edges do not close properly with stitches, then adjust those with sutures according to the method of suturing that I will describe.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is exposed to bone and skin, and it is not retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise that area and cure the wound with medicines, restore the flesh nearby in its proper place, and command the patient to eat foods in which they are accustomed: bread and those that resemble them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that area and let it drain, and cure it accordingly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these swellings the artery or vein through which flows blood cannot be avoided, and it is not cut by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut one, you incise it with a knife or ligate it; and if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood will be cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them, for before the air changes, it will solidify there.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil of turpentine, two parts blood from a dragon, and three parts cauterized fat; mix them all well and sift them, fill the swelling with it, confine it properly within a good seal, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not disturb it while it is not absorbed, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes they do this solely with cautery, when in your presence there is none of dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical operation is performed in large abscesses when you judge it should be paused over those and be straightened, and for recent abscesses close to their surface, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not understand its position. But then cure those as we have said, try to place yourself over those abscesses with hot ointments, or place yourself over those powders of flour from bread in water and honey that produce heat; and place your hand over the other cure while they are healing.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if a fracture occurs in the bone of the abscess and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the abscesses of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the injury occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head injuries when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, there is no need for any surgical intervention but to avoid treatment that causes strong constriction, as has been said by Ziniar and Zegi who describe it like vitriol and similar substances that damage the nerves and counteract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of cold on the injury at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is the seat of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with lukewarm water, some times infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and thyme when washed with lukewarm water and the other pears mingling according to this manner, and apply a moist ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the injury is large, then perform缝合，或收缩其边缘，然后在愈合时用粉末进行治疗。
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the anus, then perforate it at the most compressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has already cut an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or tie it with a ligature if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine of the shoulder has already been cut and all are saved except the veins of the neck, then you adjust the ligaments of the joint and suture over the bone of the shoulder without touching that; keep it in place and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with proper structure for a few days; then care for it with ointments that have stipticity and excitancy until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already reached the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from there; what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and the swelling around it subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then dust it with the powder that was recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it as described, of which the recall will come soon in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and affect the spine or the arm or the spear or the similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a spear or an axe, and you percuss its depth, then consider more if the wound has flatus or wind when the patient groans; then you know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it has no depth and the wound is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which could worsen the patient; instead, anoint it with attractive ointment, and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then you apply to the wound like a wick so that it exudes what has of humidity; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in the wound drains out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If, however, more than three days have passed since the onset of the plague and no spasms or heart tremors occur nor constriction of the lungs, and if other good dispositions persist, then you may conclude that the plague has subsided; then treat both with calx and another form of treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is impossible, and the space has been opened for a long time, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly according to its own capitulum.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is due to a cut by a sword or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already pierced the bone, and you are now cutting out pieces from it, then twist the wound and probe to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then leave them in place until the wound heals, as their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great pain, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine is cut, so that there is an introduction of air and fluid, making the inflammation more severe and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method. I understand that the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not prevent the introduction of air to its place promptly, as it opens and becomes swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is intermediate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And note that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two common sutures are used similarly to the sutures of other body wounds.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific wounds communicate to the other wounds, more importantly, they are more specifically in the wound of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you concerning each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine penetrates through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then know that you should moisten that attempt by submerging a sponge or a wet cloth in clear water alone, or by using squinancy, spic, and embrocations to place the intestine inside as the inflammation resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes in those cases where there is stiffness, it is better to use water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallows are steeped, for by this the instrument within it is alleviated due to little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument near this cure is to be omitted, then split the disruption a little with an instrument where the veins are embedded.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary cure is better when it is proper and not a sectioning, and should not be left to dry out unnecessarily or due to deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, let its form be such:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade sharp, and the other part blunt, with the tip subtle, but not too fine like a needle's point; rather slightly rounded.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And since the wound is enlarged and the intestine has been pushed out, then ensure that its reduction follows the natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the exact spot, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient face down and position their limbs such that their head is further back than their body; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back with their legs further back than their trunk.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in large wounds and in wounds of moderate size.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause the preparation you have made, and place it between your most skilled fingers, which hold the rupture with one hand and adjust the edges of the wound with the other. Then uncover that area to the one who will suture for any reason nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the holes according to the width of the wound; then leave a portion of the end of the disruption from the ring finger, and strongly pass the needle once, or ensure that you do not put a thread in both ends of the codena (a type of instrument), but instead pass two ends of the ciphac (thread) from the inner parts, so that you may make that part penetrate from one side; and now you have added two ends of the codena and two ends of the ciphac, and thus four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both sides together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the digit and put another needle there, and then that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until you complete all the contraction of the flap.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in the seam, therefore it is advisable that they be of medium thickness in both subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is placed at both ends of the seam closely, for then the flesh might be penetrated lightly and the flap might heal before its proper consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be excessively elongated in suturing so that the flap is not prohibited from proper consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the tips of the needles so that they do not pull out of position while sewing; and place powder extracts from all parts over the suturing area, which cover the tips of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the flap is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles suffice for their suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is performed as follows: and you should stitch the four ends, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped evenly in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have the needle penetrated these four ends, withdraw the needle from that thread from which it started, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the other side to the wound, so that the suture resembles a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightly secured.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the thickness of a small finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I healed the wound that was inflicted upon a man in his belly, which had been cut by a刀割，伤口主要部分宽约一掌，位于腹部中部两侧各约半掌处，是肢体中部的破裂；然后我在伤口经过二十四个小时后愈合后进行了修复。
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the swelling is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then that viscous fluid through natural means, and it is converted into its proper state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but I placed over the swelling as an old woman two times a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will say two species of suturing properly according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should begin with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and follows the straight and lengthwise direction of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside part through to the outside part in the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that member at the extremity of the part from outside to inside; leave the end of the catheter in this position, and insert the needle through the other internal extremity to the external side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate in the catheter at the extremity of the member which is on the inside until all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and fix the catheter at the extremity that is on the catheter in this position, and withdraw the needle from the sheath which you penetrated, and return it to the sheath with the extremity of the catheter that is on the other side; and withdraw the one from the sheath which belongs to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you cook the entire part according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you stitch with a skin needle on which you sew the skins, making sure that you stitch one half of the part from the extremity of the penis, and leave the other half inside until the suture is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second species of suture which Gualia often teaches is that you stitch with a semilunar needle on which a skilled surgeon stitches. Make sure that you join every part to its corresponding part according to nature; and apply one end of another to the other end, doing this as I have taught you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And you place the needle at your convenient side of the part from the outside, making it penetrate into that part from one side, leaving two ends of the needle; then you turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside with the other two ends.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And you turn those ends, making some parts penetrate from inside to outside through the other side of the wound on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing about which we have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that the suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these a thread in various places, and begin with the introduction of the needle from where you should start, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the suture with which I join them equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of medicinal treatment for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And this cause is when you manage to obtain the recent plague from its own secretion before the air alters it, and you return the intestine and suture it properly, then place it over that carmine powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over it certain ointments which you have prepared so that they harden and fill the cavities, and be consolidated chymically and observed; and proceed to treat it as is done for other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you are not present at the medicines, then place over it frequently, until it begins to grow flesh, and change it twice a day as you have been taught, until it heals, for you will not need other medications in small dosages when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound might communicate injury to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-refined oil or in olive oil, and place it over the area between the joints, leaving the axillae uncovered.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their bowels, then apply this several times, soak that in vinegar stiptic black terebinth, especially if the swelling has affected the bowel and caused an exitura penetrating into the cavity of the bowel.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which is from the large intestine is more slightly healing than that which is in the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gunny" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, and because of the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you are treating from the plague is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the recent raw material, reduce it according to your discretion and with which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the muscle and is already red or black, when you strengthen that with astringent on the area that is darkened, so that there may be a flow of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another in that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut-off part of the plague, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it by closing the opening of the skin and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be reduced in some individuals. This is why I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance; the wound was old, causing a fistula due to its dryness and distension.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I sought to heal him, even though the wound was not fully cleansed in its healing process, but succeeded in subtlely integrating that which was diseased into what was healthy and ensuring the area became consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the area already consolidated, I treated the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and no one was found to have been affected by this bad accident, but they maintained their usual habits of eating and drinking, and also bathed and exercised as before.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it is necessary to bind it in this manner: and that you should take large pieces of bread; then tightly close the two edges of the wound, placing one piece of bread with its surface open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it adheres by closing its mouth, cut off the head of the piece, for it does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another cauterization near the first one, and continue to make cauterizations one after another according to the size of the entire lesion.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and around the lesion; and remove those attached heads from within the intestine once it is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with fine twine made from the intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this twine from the intestine, making sure it is bare, then place the end in the fine twine and wrap it around, and then insert those needles and thread into the intestine and tie it in place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with cauterizations is merely by way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the lesion is large and extensive, especially in one of the finer intestines, where there is no visible damage, it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague or apostema when it encloses and becomes ancient, and forms a ulcer, and is not consolidated and grows a branch constantly and is not incised, then in whatever member it is, universally it is named fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, fistula is a fleshy node, hard, white at which there is no pain and at which the cavity is such as it is by the bird's wound; and for this reason, it is called that ulcer root, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in that ulcer there is moisture, which grows a branch; and the strong moisture is incised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is thick, small, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously stated in the division, when I spoke of ulcers, that every ulcer which is not healed nor is naked flesh, is not this but by one of nine causes: of which one is either due to a lack of nutrition in the body; or by malice of it; or because between it and the edges is hard flesh prohibiting the natural growth of flesh; or because it is thick pus; or because that ulcer itself contains corruption and the matter that is within it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in in the region, and there is a pestilence; or by virtue of the nature of the region, such as at Saragossa, where there is a difficult digestion of illnesses, and healing of an apostema is delayed due to its nature; or because it is bone, or pieces of bone.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicine in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I will show you how to know the cure for a fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like those of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the maladies of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation; for such is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then try with a finger or a needle. If the fistula goes straight, inquire about it from there.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead has the lightness of its body and is bent to alleviate and straighten the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cristelize the orifices with those orifices, for the humidity by which you cristelize that will also affect other orifices and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire exactly, according to the manner by which you can know if here are or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula of which only orifices move and this is all with the sum of your strength, with your examination, with which you examine the patient, and with your compression on the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes at a true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a local place, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which we and you name.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or thread and similar, cure it within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the wound until it is as deep as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with the medicine several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that wet one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must excise that part where the corruption is completely halted; and then cure that with what fills the flesh where it has healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healthy and you graft another piece of flesh as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you expose it again, and thoroughly explain and purify it with your final fortification, and then restore that area.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, that is good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should simply leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is a matter of bones, then you must extract all of them, and from them, you do not leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if it is due to some cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then make the incisions in those membranes or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if the preparation to extract the bones is not at your discretion, then pause over the area that you can allow it to heal naturally, and leave it in a position near those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the area that is not yet consolidated, and ensure that the section you have incised remains constricted in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having done this, if you fear infection, pause over the wound submerged in a hot balsam of oil, or submerge it in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments. When these can be applied, and the bones are sufficiently separated from the flesh, then the swelling is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the hip or thigh bone or similar, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface, then rush that area only behind where the blackness and corruption are obstructed, and place it to restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area and excise it thoroughly at the place where the corruption has spread, and cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you when dealing with a patient in the thigh, to place that example and helper over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, who experiences pain in his thigh. The pain within the parts is over the matter inside the body where the matter has spread to the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess extended over time due to the error of the doctors where the abscess became mature, and the matter began to rupture. The cure was nearly paused when the thigh fistulated, and made openings in the lump through which pus and bodily fluids flowed.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor cares for a full two years, and does not apply fire to those knowing more in the art, while I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there you see the leg and the fluids that flowed from it through those openings; and by then, the condition of that man was entirely stiffened and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that could be reached from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I positioned myself and incised over one of the openings where I could describe a part of the bone, and found the corrupted vessel, which was already terrible, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I conjecture that it is not in the bone but that corruption which abscides and constricts, and I had already razored it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then pause the restoration of the lesion with long-term consolidative medicines, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And constrict what appears to be that corruption, and then you must perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it is not restored until you incise around a palm's breadth of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of it, but rather due to the position of the fracture and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, for it suffers continuously due to excessive evacuation leading to poor circulation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is through complete healing, and nothing in place of healthy flesh endures; and it is well made the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is changed in his dispositions and not forced upon him contrary movements nor damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then you must reduce it according to this manner: take firm and strong hold of it at the extremity of the prominent bone, and command someone to extend it. Place a larger woolen pad over the flesh that is left behind by the bone; extend the end of the pad so that it draws the flesh towards the space left. You should uncover the flesh in the area you wish to cut through so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or table properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw through the damaged flesh without disturbing it.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you must ensure that the sawing is over the damaged area little by little, for if the corruption is within the bone's cavity and does not appear in its appearance through sensation, you may have to make another pass with the saw.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fusts there, and make the incision at the place where the corruption is inside, ensuring that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but is displaced.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or chest, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your ability. And whatever displacement should be corrected by you, as long as it does not contravene veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation an instrument convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument of which you need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of ailments, for when you have them through your practice, you will do what is convenient for it with the instruments for all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall know at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as simples from which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience with the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another will be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of the ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the shape of the prongs of an astfelkey.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not convey any other treatment but that the heads of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or that the large opening be wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of the larger razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of the flat razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of well-made knife points.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor blade:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a surgical instrument with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller surgical instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another surgical instrument; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a锋利的边缘，其在骨的比例位置处显现。
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray which conforms to the proportion of that which is drilled into the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and sharply pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of steel from India, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the incision of extremities and the jointing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities suffer pain either from an intrinsic cause or from an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure did not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into this so that it accedes the corruption, in order to expel the evil either through death or malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of him upon whom this occurs is that the member turns black before it is cauterized as if it were already burned, or you may notice the blackness in that area where the burn has entered that part and taken possession of the whole body; therefore, you must immediately intervene for that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as from a scorpion, a viper, or a rattle snake, and similar to this.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the knee and the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers the sole of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the heel, then incise the leg between the joint of the heel.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the heel, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or sewing it is that you hold the ligament in the part you want to incise, and leave another where you wish; extend a ligament to the parts left, and extend the minister another one there; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is completely exposed; then it should be incised or sewn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides over it so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned when coming to the patient.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you encounter a flow of blood while working, then cauterize the area frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the blood; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the injured member with a ligament as is convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if someone finds a black spot on their foot, this accident which you and I have advised about, is caused by a burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said intestine.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares himself to wait until the healing goes to the member with the urgency of his pain and from the intensity of his discomfort, and the inflammation in that part enters the joint, and the wound heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time that corruption accidently occurs in the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I perform the task of reflecting on that excess to be administered where it is placed on the hand of the medicines; and the excess does not reflect but begins to go into another part where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they make me inflame the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this fearing the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the inflammation of the hand of the patient, for the virtue of gout was potent.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he wakes from me, he returns to his land and tells me that that person prepared and inflamed his hand entirely, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guideline by which it may be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of the bowels and the quality of the enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the abscess is prolonged, collecting pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is extracted, leaving the location void as if it were a vessel, and the cloth above it remains like a thin cover, and no further corruption is reached, nor does it imprint on bone or nerve or sinew, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were stirred, especially when made thin and formed like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the clog adheres and that the corruption has not succeeded by a later consequence, and on the clog it has passed through facing, then you cure that with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the hand that exudes has a foul odor, then treat it with an enema using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil, wine, and honey, each part in equal quantities, placed in a vessel and heated over a fire until the medicine boils and reaches the desired temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; then treat the sinus with this, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine completely; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the swelling subsides.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is performed with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes of vitriol, pour them into water; and then extract that and treat the sinus until you are sure the sinus has been sufficiently treated.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with a third part of myrrh, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to modify and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess ofstringiness and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinus is sufficiently cleansed, then use a mixture that promotes flesh growth in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take ointment of dyafinicon, dissolve that mixture with diluted oil and stringy wine; or you use a mixture for clistering with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus开口较大，不能容纳导管，那么你逐渐用小铁棒扩大那个开口，并在扩大的过程中，在开口处放置包裹着埃及药膏或百里香膏的湿敷布。
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is wide, then you should suture the lips of it and leave in it a quantity in which the enema can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the parts above, then dry that at the lower place where it is located so that the stream can flow into it; when the stream is contained in the curvature of the sinus, the flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area of the lower part as you wish, then you should perforate and prepare the member for the preparation by which the stream flows through it slightly according to what is at your disposal and so that no cause of the stream is retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that be placed over the sinus conveniently as you wish, extending them on linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such great quantity as to cover the entire sinus; then cut with scissors along the right side of the opening of the sinus a slit slightly wider than the opening of the sinus; then extend on another piece of linen the leon ointment according to the size of the slit, and place it over the area far from the opening of the sinus so that the stream is alleviated and does not hinder the cloth greatly, but only for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the aperture of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out what is inserted in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from it is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the aperture of the sinus has adhered, or is approaching adherence, then hold it loose or for a day, and when you remove the bandage, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the sinus there is a subtle virus spreading, then do not worry about its adherence, for the healing of it progresses, for in some people the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer, and in those, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for nearly days it is situated in indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment dauphinycon when there is excessive addition of resin.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And for the one that is most recent and needs treatment, you should take an ointment dauphinycon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it well on the wound, and use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And make it seem in that action, when there is no hand, use dauphinycon ointment, and when myrrh and aloes and saffron are present, mix them all and powder them over the honey while it is on fire, and then lay this over cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and lay this on the honey which you have mixed and made thick, and strengthen that with cloth.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to her with long artery juice and root of celestial lily (and this is the celestial lily) and powder of ergot and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted, press them and sift over honey which I have recommended; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is hard in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prized, or is corrupted from a carbuncle, or is corrupted, and a branch enters where you corrode the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupts that part entirely, and thoroughly allows its corruption to penetrate into the bone within which there is an offensive smell, and the extremity of the finger is cut off, and the color of it becomes jaundiced.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not connect your cure, then proceed to remove all the fluid that is released from the joint and place a cautery on it, for a cautery motion is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint are drawn to compress the flesh towards the inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead them, then you should pause a fine needle at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, push it out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines corrosive burn in between until it is thoroughly treated; then cure that with ointment once it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and the corruption spread to the same area, then incise there in one of the sinuses according to where its location is remembered, and cure that once it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then at the beginning lanced the patient, and quickly draw out the fluid from the joint with a sharp needle by transverse sectioning above in juice, and guard that the section does not reach into the flesh left in the joint, for you will thereby cause the patient intense pain, which is due to the nature of excess adjusted flesh in that place; and cure that area with what alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Moreover, by "adjusted," which is inherent in many people, the flesh is very heavy, and the bones are very light, or the joint is very heavy.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of it is located in the region of the joint, or the nature of it is situated in certain nodules of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Moreover, that which is located in certain nodules of the fingers is not severe, while that which is located in the joints is more painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshy, the section is light, and you should incise it with a broad needle.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for one born near the joint, the cure is; therefore, guard yourself from its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult for one born near the kneecap, cut into the beginning of the flesh around in a round incision into the bone, and nearby will be one of those suitable grooves for this, and cure that within until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles due to observed spots or by nature of the person who is born with them, or by consolidation from plague or by burning, then you must cure that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place your hand between his sheets where you have infused oil to ensure they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are properly consolidated.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you must cure that consolidation according to preparation and restore them to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of varicose veins, so they are.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are such, and they are thickened veins full of melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, and their greatest appearance is in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel much, work much, and carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More importantly, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this manner: wet the groin area with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is due to the heat of the groin. Then strengthen the area around the patient's thigh just below the inner part of the knee with a bandage on the outer side of the thigh. Next, dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide drying technique. Meanwhile, lift the black blood with your hand from the lower part of the groin up to its center and beyond, until the desired quantity of blood has drained out, which is sufficient to diminish the power of the malady.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then raise her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you should pull the thigh of the patient, if there are hairs on it, and then immerse the leg in warm water and rub the thigh with wet cloths until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it with strong exertion if hot water is not available, until the limb is flushed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the leg along the vein by sectioning it or in its lower part you should cut it off.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the leg with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you notice it, and observe carefully as that rope-like structure begins to turn black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as you cut the leg, you should see that white thing which is like a rope.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that leg elevated and bent at the knee, and suspend it on an cushion or lion skin.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then heat another part near that section for three days, and then scrape the knee from above the vein as it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the leg, and then extract and elevate it as it is inserted through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this as you extract it from the section that is higher up or above all sections, once everything is inserted; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie that thread, extracting it. Or insert a rod and rotate your hand in all directions until it is inserted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and will have come down due to the damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have thoroughly washed it out, then place over the wound lamb's wool soaked in wine and olive oil, either well-filtered or not, and dress it so that it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut over that entirely from the part of the tortuosity and at the locations of the envelopment, and place it suspended by ties so that you raise that entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult to raise that; use your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a tie orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be as with other ties (uncis) nor of sharp extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands of calves as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, in dry and barren lands with little endurance where no grass or trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And elsewhere in the body, this vein is generated other than in the calves.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain as venom inside the body becomes serpents, vermin, and worms that generate between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this is when you encounter inflammation in the calf; then, nearby, the area becomes swollen; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that swelling, seeming like a plant growing out.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when the extremity appears, cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one dragon. Two dragons' worth, and note it, leaving the lead suspended from the calf.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while something is outside, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because the abscess should be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the anus, and no cause should be left in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have been stretched to the length of five or six palms and I have already been informed that one was stretched to twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during the time of its medication, then insert the needle into the vein and puncture that part along the length of the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has roots, and more especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and water flows into it through many openings, and is derived from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and what was said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called the cattle disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands as the cattle disease because many times it affects cows and there is a worm that is native between the bone and the flesh, and goes throughout the body up and down, and is shown by its own movement from member to member breaking through the bone and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, worms, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the vein, then greatly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not fail to observe its circulation and appearance through sensation, then check what is on it and what is left it in firm compression and construction, and dry it thoroughly and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is palpated in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you find that it has reached near the heart, then apply strong strictures over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and observe that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that evacuate corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on the illness of gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called gout in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is displaced from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I have seen that which I shall recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman at a village, and examined her arm and found a small swelling in the vein of the arm, and after being pressed for about an hour, I saw that this swelling rose up like a worm rising from below, albeit less urgently than feared, like greenish silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I applied myself to the pain in that area and pressed it into the muscle, and placed my hand there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I corrected the other side of the body near where I treated the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was asked to move herself all over her body as you could see; and it was too marvelous to observe the change in her and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my hands according to that manner, but I have seen movements where it is evident that the pain is being permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have such heels as in the female.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is due to the fact that the female had a thin body and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of that fullness has changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that there be no appearance of this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have soft, engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear as we have said regarding the heel, then strengthen that area and gently and thoroughly apply pressure to it until the constricted fullness is inserted, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the heel, then cure that by discharging from the body and what you expel of fullness, and purge those with stinky pills and pills of sesame and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and silent, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues; and of those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet in which they lodge is according to two manners: for the members or are principal organs affected, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it lodges in any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will explain soon, then you should avoid extracting that arrow in those where death is due to its location in the major organs, and when you do not appear these bad signs and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of poisoning are when the arrow lodges in it, passes through the bone, and is situated above the brain, which is on top of the skull, for it happens due to the strong poison, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the pupils, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. The patient feels a heavy head, with the speech cut off and the voice destroyed, and is situated at the site of the wound white moisture resembling powder, and from it appearing like an excess of fleshiness.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it is in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and you feel a hard lump there which is not visible; and strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the dark bloody wound, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor of the face, and syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends totally hopeless.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are engorged, and the color of the patient is changed, and he exhales a great spirit or sighs for air with difficulty.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain with much sighing, and not all the members' muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, then strongly raise the part of the wound containing some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you press on the arrow in the belly, and it is embedded there, raise some opening of the wound, or the flesh, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for its cure by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow presses on the bladder, and urine flows out, and its process is due to some cause at the parts outside, and strong pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, helper muscle, spinal column, furcula, coxa, and the like parts resembling the limbs, are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not find vein nor artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand from this about their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that an arrow struck the eye of a man in one eye at the corner of his eyelid near the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the bone of his ear with him, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the bone of his eye, leaving the eyelid, but the arrow was hidden and could not be removed except for a small extremity which adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion made of iron on which there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and was not injured in his eye, which would have been badly injured.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was struck in the shoulder, and it was an Arab arrow, and that one with its ears; then I incised over it between two muscles, and it was submerged in his shoulder; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man which was embedded in his stomach, and I observed that he died from that; therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to his disposition, incised over the arrow and ligated thereon, and he recovered, and was not harmed by this accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow pierced his back, and the wound had healed over it, and after approaching seven years, incised the arrow in the region of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman to whom an arrow pierced her stomach, and the wound had healed inside it, and no change occurred in any of her natural operations, and the woman did not experience any harm from her operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man to whom an arrow pierced his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken, not experiencing much pain, and appeared similar to this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal advisor, which was embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly declined to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the cure of him near the wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you will find the wound of the arrow stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels subtle and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture and put his right ear there, and then suspected that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the place to be applied with an attractive and digestive paste, believing that by placing it there, I will appear the location of the arrow, so that it dries on that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit; and continue applying the paste over it for several days without missing any spot; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and treat the damage from its extraction for a period of several days until one day I feel the arrow within its sheath and tell me this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up, and over the swelling, I will touch it, and find the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I manipulate that, and without hesitation, I do not cease to refine and invent various methods of this art until one day by chance I managed to grasp the arrow with descending forceps, according to which the shape will be described at the end of this chapter; after which I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was entirely cured without any defect in him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and what is present about what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they entered; or by the contrary part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place where it entered, or the arrow penetrates into a fleshly location and is then thrust in and out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey to the sensation of the hour in which it was injected, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey to your sensation, then leave it for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion on any given day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then know that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at that place of the bone from which subtle travel subsists into the area where the arrow is magnified.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has already penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the malaise after some of those accidents which you call, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it there until its being settles for some days; or if the arrow reaches the cerebellum, then death is not prolonged for it.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed in the bone of the chest but only in the chest and does not pass into the cerebellum, and remains as a malaise for some days, and you do not encounter any cause of those accidents, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and its remnants.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly fixed and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and soon cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area, and if you feel it, then remove that with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound to enlarge it and make it possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ear where it is lodged, then you expose the flesh in which it is embedded by cutting away all parts as much as you can; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot reach the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas where it must yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then you use your hand or forceps at all parts where it can make it yield; and with subtle skill, ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and that of the wound.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot treat that in your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then repeat that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it makes the patient's blood flow more, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, tardiness, and firmness as you have advised.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are counter-thrown in the opposite direction of another part, or that have already acted on some part from within to the parts outside, or cause engorgement at the tip of the arrow due to pressure from the deeper part; then you extract it; and the extraction should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light by ejection.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist the knife according to the opposite direction so that the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarge it by inserting, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave it for a few days, and then reinsert it where it is embedded.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft is embedded and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it resists, stir with a concave tool so that its concavity enters the arrow's groove, and then push it into place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it with a strong stirrup entering it, so that the arrow expands due to this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is nearby such that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it from there, then extract it and carefully close the wound, and cure that area until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps to which arrows are attached:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If the ends are like the beak of an eagle, made such that they grasp the arrow so as not to let it slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in special sizes, large, few, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its depth.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the concave part at this end is made like the claw of an eagle so that it facilitates the removal of the arrow from the wound, and propels that dull object:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing of deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	thus, in order that the instrument may be eased into the concave arrow and pressed towards it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Of phlebotomy of the veins: Of which veins it is customary to perform phlebotomy, they are in chapter XVI, and there are two pulsating veins near the ears, which Alhacen calls auricular; two herbs that are prominently visible on the temples; two veins near the inner corners of the eyes, which are called angular; one vein in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guide veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; and there are two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five; of which one is cephalic, and it is derived from the wild grapevine; the people call it “the vein of the head,” and it is a mixed vein composed of one branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein; they name that one "the vein of all the body," while the basilic vein, which is derived from the domestic grapevine, is called "citillary," and the common people call it "the vein of the abdomen"; one is the funicular, and it is placed over the elbow, and this is the one on which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the arm by a clear manifestation; and saphena, which is the vein between the said auricular and the small one mentioned, and it is in those two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer's leg; the second is sophena, and its place is at the thigh of the domestic deer; the sciatic vein, and its place is at the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins near the ears is cataris ancient, emigranea, sahafati, and ulceracios of the bad ancient headaches.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sagnating those is according to what I will recount to you: it should be placed at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are near the ears with a wide cloth for good friction; then tightly tie the patient's own hair with a band in which the two appear, and their locations are close to the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you should feel those at your right hand, and if you sense the pulse of those at your right hand here, test it by this method.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical lancet, and that which is incised, and then you introduce it there into the groin between where the phlebotomy will reach the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand above the vein and the groin towards the upper parts and incise the vein with an incising lancet.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two digits' width or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than the two arteries that supply the temples with vitality, this condition is associated with ancient and malicious migraines, frequent eye strain, and a body burdened with acute internal inflammations.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with your hand until the two veins appear clearly by palpation, and show the pulse at their location with your finger; then you can proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the fleubotomi incidentally, and elevate the vein in them; and incise that likewise as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the malaise, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place there powders and strengthen that above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now the recollection of them has been preceded, and then the incision, and the extraction at the beginning of the libra.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the relief of the bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is similar to the cephalic bloodletting for ancient illnesses of the face and migraine, as well as swelling and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting from it is as I will recount to you; so, let the malaise strengthen its hold with a bandage through which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named the fossor, this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the point where it is at the top of the drain over that vein and strike it either with your hand inclined or for some other cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation in the patient and strengthen it so that it may heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes it is opened by lateral phlebotomy, but I do not know if the lateral phlebotomy is of such acute extremity as other phlebotomies, and instead is of subtil extremity, and phlebotomize there according to the transversal, for the bone is near and strong, so it would be broken by the phlebotomy when it is too thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the juvenile of the two veins that are at the lacrimal glands of both eyes through the hair of the eye by redness and pus in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens his color with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the incision for bloodletting according to the transversal length a little, making a few small incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, strengthen its extremity so it does not break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the blood run until it is necessary, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for one night, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More so the incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense thirst, as well as facial maladies, migraines, and rash that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the incision for it is that the patient holds his neck and almost presses his nose with his left hand, holding the subtle long incision tool in your right hand and placing it in the middle location of the nasal cavity according to the proper direction, because the vein does not appear here through sensation, and so blood begins to flow quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Gently withdraw your hand from the incision little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then place it there for one night, because that area is restored rather quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constriction of the veins and to the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and bad, corroding ulcers similarly as in phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his thigh; and the surgeons are over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually incise the vein along its length for a femoral incision, making it progressively smaller; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make a similar incision on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the flesh and firm the two veins with a middle string so that the patient is not overheated, and leaves in the wound until the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the femoral incision for the algirich veins, apply to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malade, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then revolve the labia and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the labium and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more is found in the circuit of those small dark veins; then incise each by an incisive incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if doubt exists, you, and you do not know which is of those, then understand the incision of the larger one of those, and of the more obvious one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the labia above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is customarily better to incise both veins that are in the labia.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And of the two veins that are left, the treatment is near the femoral incision in preparations that are in the inguinal region, for the disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing a femoral puncture is to follow the patient's thigh in front of the groin, elevate the artery within it, and observe its tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is gradually turning black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform a femoral puncture on each side; and beware that you do not complete the puncture on those, as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are punctured in the groin are those in which blood flows commonly in all men, and the puncture of them is made according to two methods: either place a small round metal probe or an olive stick subtilizing; or make a surgical puncture with a lancet, which they call a needel; and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this lancet is to be sectioned and of those its species are thin and subtil according to the width of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of femoral puncture with a mirtilat:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the wound be like this you see, and you need to open the concave veins full of apparent large vessels, and at those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way to perform an olive bleed:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this fistula operation is of lesser width and has a finer extremity, and it suits the fistula of fine veins containing subtle citrine pus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the operation of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the pus from the illnesses that affect the arm, the elbow, and the foot and leg.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it suits the fistula operator, when performing that fistulotomy, to guard well and be overly careful there, for if he misses or misaligns in the puncture of the fistulotomy, he will cut the artery and cause flows of pus, so that one must not perform a fistulotomy with a pointed puncture before cutting as with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you should leave it and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform the fistulotomy at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and dry out the other with a lancet as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want the femoral incision, then cut in front of the stricture of the thigh where you feel the location of the pulse, and immediately clamp it with forceps; then hold the thigh and dry the vein by making a concave section for the incision as we have said before; and be careful that the percussion does not occur over some space of the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you press with the ligature, inflation occurs in the place you clamped with forceps, and this inflation is due to the artery. Therefore, avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the wound flows like that of a child's incision, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is arterial blood; then close and pause your hand over that for a long space; and hold near that, and if the flow is stopped, or if several drops are stopped, then strengthen the thigh and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from the moccio of the foot, and fear too much for it, and do not wet that for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the bleeding is not stopped, and sometimes you must not be present medicine for this, when you incise the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity will be constricted, and the blood is cut off; or that you take fresh from a fistula, do that, and take half of it and strengthen that on the place of the vein at strictura descent with liament and powders the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; and if not, then cure it with that of which it is preceded in the memory of the place of the powder-like substances stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the bleeding from it is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of using a splint on the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part subirana of the head and from the part dejos of the body; therefore, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the incision during the bloodletting where it is above the knee in the bloodletting of the leg, for that is a nerve; and then if you adjust at the puncture of the bloodletting and find the nerve, it will happen to you a stupor, and the healing is difficult, and not strong is healed completely. This nerve motas veigadas appears in sensation; and if it is hidden among some men and is subtle and is not shown, then cover the bloodletting with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve symptoms of headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And cover properly, if you want the bloodletting to puncture at an olive bloodletting or a myrtle bloodletting; for it is pure from all veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, however, you should perform the incision but ensure that in the incision you do not puncture the head of the vein solely, and seek the location more gently, and do not note it if it is not inflamed by the primary percussion which is over that area several times during the incision.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, however, an abscess is present in some individuals, when it is not incised during the first percussion, then do not note it again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the incision and the accidents related to it are motifs in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you must know that an incision should be made only for preservation of health and with hope for its success and caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses, and that the incision be made on one of the veins in the groin: the cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the incision be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a femoral incision should be made and the third day or after the first day when three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more frequently a femoral incision is administered, the more it becomes necessary and convenient at that time, whether at night or during the day, in any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let a boy not be femoral incised until he has fourteen years, and a girl who is pregnant should not be femoral incised unless after the fourth month into the seventh month, and women should not be femoral incised which have passed fifty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be femoral incised in any manner, let them modify their intestines before the femoral incision by using a leon clyster if there is a blocked fenda, so that the veins do not release superfluous fluids during the femoral incision of the intestines, which are purified and do not affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let no patients who are nauseous, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or intoxication be femoral incised until they have fully recovered from these conditions. Nor should femoral incision be feared too closely following colic pain, vomiting, abdominal condition, frequent coitus, work, and exercise, fasting or vigil, or any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible to him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some reason that the wound may be sublimated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the bloodletting on the feet of the patient, so when it is around the hour of three, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be guarded on that day from all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is toil or superfluous pain, intercourse, and things similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her service, have ready the causes in the use of which custom among men is based on aroma and odor, and on balsams, according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bloodletter on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient is to be bloodletted.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the flébotome two or three times; and tightly bind the limb with a belt and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tempered, that is, when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to relaxation, then prohibit the body from flowing blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the stricture is present, have those who are to perform the bloodletting rub their hands together between them where the veins are swollen, and make sure they are clearly felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the bloodletter should apply a little antiseptic oil to the bloodletting tool properly; then place his index finger on the vein with his left hand, positioning the location for the bloodletting so that the vein slightly opens up and the percussion is felt. This is done because the vein feels like a fleeing cord, indicating it is full of venosity. When you stop the bloodletting over this area, if the vein contracts, it shows the bloodletting was effective; otherwise, if no change occurs, the bloodletting did not work.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this cause, the phlebotomist should be fixed and solicit in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then place the phlebotomist, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this or another incision, leaving that area a little, or over it apply compression, if the area is not suppurating.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is suppurating, or the disease suppurates, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not apply strong poultices, for fear that the suppurating wound be irritated by the heat, nor enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and the wound heals subtly, and you fear that it will not heal the quantity you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to rectitude and adjust slightly for the perception. Do so with compression before the area suppurates, for the area suppurates more when you should use a smaller perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not touch it, for it is unnecessary for any cause; and place yourself over a part of the wound's edge, for it alleviates the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, in all femoral surgery where the veins are cut off from the body's flow of blood, administer a part of the wound edge. They use tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood becomes thin and is circulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated in the femoral surgery area, where major fevers occur, especially for those not yet drained but that fever, or near the appearance of the small vein, then you should apply and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And ensure that you do this near the bleeding from that vein with a complement of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any discoloration or greenishness in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over that a cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of menthastre juice or calament or semblance of it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when black spots occur, you should perform a bloodletting at the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it, and if at that time you find it soft, apply a compress to that area, as such an eminence is bad and evil; and then be careful to place a cause of what we have said there, for strong pus will flow from the sanguine artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice where there is stiffness, to make the area tougher, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And ensure that you draw from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the blood according to how it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	When the blood is black, you let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it appears thick, you let it flow until it becomes finer; and similarly, if it is thin, you let it flow until its thinness is moderated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and have the need for a single bloodletting, enlarge the incision in the vein and let the bleeding be abundant.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and ensure that the bloodletting is done in multiple sessions, and that it is conducted steadily.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for venous bloodletting is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and is more useful and safer than bloodletting according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when this method is prone to causing syncope, perform the bloodletting and ensure that you treat it beforehand with a small dose of wine infused with milgrass or simple oxymel; then extract from the point of the bleeding in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is an infiltration of humor, then before phlebotomy, apply a liniment of myrrh essence or of aromatic honey essence with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or of aromatic and fragrant essence.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you experience syncope during phlebotomy, and it is caused by the loss of vital spirits, then give to drink water with meat essence and subtle fragrant essence; use its aromaticity with allspice, and bind his feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division on syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if one wishes to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply phlebotomy to him, which is by natural evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over several days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wishes to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	More who wish to draw the blood from the body or contrary to the part where it declines, let it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	More in that body where there is movement of blood already scalded and heated and causes fever, let it be evacuated from the blood in one day and let a large quantity be removed, and amplify the sensation before syncopal attack occurs; but you should have retained all the conditions for phlebotomy; and by placing your hand on the pulse of the patient, you will control the body's blood flow, so that it does not result in death instead of syncopal attack, when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not let it be when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with great intensity and slightly extend it, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it remain until the phlebotomy is performed again; or keep this point at the heat of the phlebotomy where the blood coagulates in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand over the tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and apply a light compression until the blood has settled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the abscess according to the case, and there is no excuse, then drain it at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised in place of the funica or basilica when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of incising this vein is that the patient inserts his hand into water when the vein becomes visible and noticeably swollen.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tightly bind it with lint to create a midline stricture; and then incise according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and let your incision for this vein be a little above the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then repeatedly dip your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly dipping your hand in the trailing water, and instead pause the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the basilic vein in the right arm is related to ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you should firmly grasp it with your hand or with another, rather than keeping it more in trailing water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then quickly perform the phlebotomy; and if you cut through it completely, no harm will come of this.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And conserve that you do not finish placing your hand at the femoral puncture, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and devoid of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in the water basin and let the blood flow in it, for if you do not immerse that in the water basin, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it will not be completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover, the youth of the femoral puncture on that side of the hand is that it is applied to the diseases of the thigh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the femoral puncture on the other side as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the femoral vein from the puncture is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the thigh, and retention of menses, and for diseases of rashes and ulcers of thighs and old sores, and for their similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient's foot enters into cauda and makes friction over which the veins appear; a cord is placed at the joint of the foot; the place of the vein should be clearly identified by the said touch, and from there its branches on the face of the foot are felt.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus make the femoral incision wider or place the cord at the site where you identify the vein, which is better and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you make the femoral incision on the face of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and place your incision over the area where you make the puncture, as if you were to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of blood is prohibited; then you wet the foot in cauda water and let the blood flow in that area until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the femoral incisor errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the femoral incision a little more, for the location is secure. And do not fear its malignity; rather, guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make a cut on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said; you should make the incision leaving the rib of the part intact.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the indication for phlebotomy of the leg is pain in the hip when it is due to venous obstruction.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for the leg is that the patient enters bathed, exercises and strengthens the thigh with a bandage made of a thin cloth wrapped around from above the hip to just below four fingers, so that it is not noticeable.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it becomes apparent, then phlebotomize there according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the transversum, which is better; or incise there for an incision, or evacuate it by suction, for the place is sound.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often more easily found in men; and if you find it but do not notice it by touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot between the auricular and the annular toes.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and place your hand over the area of the phlebotomy firmly, so that it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are of corns, or of worms, or of fire.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done in two ways: one way involves incision and bloodletting, and the other is through ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that involves incision is done in two ways, which can be either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the ventilations that are administered with incision and bloodletting, there are fourteen places of the body, of which one where ventilation is paused is almost always the last part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; ventilations of the chin leave the jaw below and the mouth above; ventilations of the cheeks leave the mandible below and the mouth above; ventilations of the armpits, which are on the side of the shoulder blade; ventilations of the lumbar region, which is over the end of the ribcage; ventilations of the iliac bones, which are two handbreadths long; ventilations of the tibiae; and ventilations of the thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not extract the blood from the artery but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not damage its virtue as with venesection; nor should you believe that phlebotomy is done by fire or several fires in any illness caused by congestion where the whole body must be evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes to phlebotomy for illness or for continuity, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men in whom blood is multiplied within them and who suffer from the extraction of it by phlebotomy with great severity; and among them are those who find congestion and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and among them are those who feel pain in their face and forehead with darkness and dullness in their eyes; and among them who lose the site of their phlebotomy; and among them whose laughter is multiplied; and among them who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue swells and they spit blood; and among them whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their sleep as red spots and plaques and other causes like theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth part of the moon, then command ventilation to be made rather after passing one or two hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the purpose of ventilation of the neck is when you apply gravity to the head and what is embedded in the heels; more correctly that this should be close to the total evacuation of the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this, it is not advisable to use those that are inflamed, in which there are gouty affections.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More for that which remains inflamed, it causes oblivion; and for this, you should command the ventillator to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More ventilation of alkahel is in the place of femoral and basilica vein phlebotomy: and by this you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of air and to the rupture of the windpipe, and to coughs, and to fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And ensure that the alkahel ventoz is slightly inflated, for if it is paused, it engenders weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of alhagdahan contributes to headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, and toothaches; it is in the place of femoral phlebotomy.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And ensure that you command the ventozador not to press his hand at the scarification so as not to incise the artery and damage the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if the ventilation is applied to the mento, it causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and a complexion like those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, located near the alheric veins under the lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the ventilation that is made over the two spoons be conducted by capillarity, which is performed through the transfer of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two openings inside the flasks contributes to the effect of the femoral, jugular, and cephalic bloodletting, for it draws the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those fine veins among the larger ones through which the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventillator not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation whereupon the wind is directed over the hocks and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and leave them so.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure you command the ventillator to use a large ventilation, and of ear wax, for the area requires strong drying; and let the fine, light ventilations be performed only after incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wind from the legs diminishes manifestly, which carry the sickness from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the hips and the stomach; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bloat and acid; and are in place of a double femoral lancing, and hanged, and of two calves.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the winds they hanged the youth near the winds of two hips.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the wind near the beginning view and suck out the air with a slightly moistened suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pause them lightly, remain them continuously, and let the humors come to the area by chance equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and the sign of the sickness appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and gradually increase the suction, and place the body in a suitable position.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	And for a man who has tender skin, incise him only once and not further, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to increase the incision and slightly enlarge it, and adjust the suction to facilitate it.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the wound becomes infected, then incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for fluid drainage from the wound and its pus.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second incision, perform a thorough examination before draining the infected pus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is mixed with feces, then make the third incision to ensure it drains properly.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the pus little by little or just a small amount, suffice with one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of bad blood, we make a cut with a scarifying incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify by scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which only the depth of the incision is used.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the part where the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the places for the suction cups should be gently anointed with open resolving oils; if it is in summer, such as olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violets, or balsam oil, or myrrh oil; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and hard, then apply yellowish oil, or balsam oil, or aloeswood oil, or nutmeg oil, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Moreover, if the suction cup is on flesh with wide pores, then it should be prohibited from oil, and instead, the areas near the suction should be washed with cold water or fresh sweat water, or vinegar water, or grape leaf water, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that of which the pain is due to a humid nature, wash his bowels with warm wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that of which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with old wine, or with water of santewort, which is marjoram, or of decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And ensure that the bowels are taken care of before bathing; have them administered shortly after bathing for about an hour or two, and make sure he sleeps near the bowel area.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done for the patient to be regulated before and after purging or bloodletting.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Ensure that you consider the beginning: when the purger or the one who is to be bloodletted is choleric and has acute pain and inflammation, ensure that he takes cooling causes, such as sour milgrains, endive in warm wine, laytigues, secanabin, and julep, and similar remedies.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them thus like pears, chicken livers, and spiced game meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, in their likeness.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that one whose complexion is pale, give him to drink essence of mint, or essence of alecost with seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with both old and new; and let him be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and consume foods like pears, cantaloupes, and young partridges.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And ensure that on the day of phlebotomy, his drinking is greater than his food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And ensure that some men are given to drink tyriaca alfarac or medicinal powders of musk, such as muscardine or acelita, before phlebotomy or before ventozacio or shortly after, so that the principal members be comforted and the wound be subtiled; and do not let them take any scalding drinks.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More specifically, the ventozas that are ses scarification should be applied to the liver, over the mesentery and podagra, over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the axilla; for these principal members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those alone but an attraction of the limb's vein, thus as we apply a suction cup on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that the fatty substance free from viscidity of the limb may be dissolved, thus as we apply over the belly and the umbilicus; for then it rarifies the limb and warms it and alleviates the pain which resolves the fatness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied over the veins when there is an accident in their obstruction or phlegm, for by virtue of strong attraction it opens the obstruction and expels the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when applied over the liver and spleen, to dissolve fatness in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are applied only with suction; sometimes they are applied with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied filled with clear water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the suction cup may be filled and become larger, then either clear water or water in which suitable herbs are infused.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form a ventouse with fire: make the aperture about two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of suction should be half a palm's breadth; place it in the center, in the area along the circumference, making it small according to the amount that an needle can enter.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make it of leather or citrus, with thick edges, lion's skin, equal and thin so that it does not deform the member in its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be placed at the midpoint of the leather or iron ring, where the candle is paused over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this ventouse be much larger than the one we have described; and the smaller amount according to the ailments and the condition of those who use it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventouses for children and those in poor health are different from those for young and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this ventouse on fire over the member is to extend the flame of a decent piece of wood before a small candle of wax, and place it at the midpoint of the transverse leather strap in the center of the ventouse, so that the fire is ignited around the placement of the leather strap without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place your hand over the part of the patient, and tell them about what we have said, within which when we have the vapors and do not intend for them to hold what is said and that the vapor dissipates over that part, then the vapor will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the case of a ventosa that is administered for pleurisy, it should be with water, in which there is no cross groove nor tube, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the part only as much as necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members in which the position of ventosas is not possible due to their small size, such as the fingers and similar parts; or in a member stripped of flesh, such as the nose and ears and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the waters of pools purified.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And shortly let them lie in warm water for a day and a night, so that they do not cause any inflammation in those; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with venesection and fumigations; and rub the limb of the patient when it turns red; and place them over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, suck the area with the fumigations, it is more effective for youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not possible, then wash the area with water warmed and add a bit of vinegar; and rub and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding of the body persists at the place where the leeches are attached, and they continue to draw blood, then insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is excessive, then powder vitriol trissat or similar substances to those causing vasoconstriction over it; or place hot poultices of peeled fava beans on the area and let them remain until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding has stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And cover, if necessary, the wound with bandages, when possible changing them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bandages are prohibited from being changed, then wash the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the areas until it is saturated with blood; and then change them quickly whenever there is any bleeding.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to constrict, powder the area with a little aloes trissat, or salt, or ashes, and apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the procedures of the second part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that both the boastful physicians and the common folk, as well as those who for some time have not read the works of the Ancients or have not studied their texts even one letter, claim this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it even for some time; and I have not acquired what follows except through long reading of the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have directed this experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abbreviate this for you others and deliver this from lengthy discourse; and I abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown this at the end of declaration; and I have formed these motions of forms of instruments you administer there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections are necessary for the fractures of bones, those of which a prerequisite is required before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and various types thereof.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin the prologue of this chapter with summaries of the discourse; and the chapters which require understanding at the beginning are those on which the artisan must stand firm on the truth of those. So it is you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting occurs, you must immediately proceed to the beginning with ligation or release of that, or both, unless some cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or if it is the one to which it happens, or in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore it should be maintained on a diet of fresh herbs and of flesh from pigeons and of crabs; and meats that are fatty and filling should be prohibited, as well as all foods that fill the veins with sanguine humor, until you are safe from the danger of an abscess. And if you fear an effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his primary position according to the usual custom for him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient is fed nutritious foods rich in both fine and heavy moisture, with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, fresh peas, and coarse foods similar to these. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly by honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones crack in those who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be cured and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are cured and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs, and they are cured and consolidated those that are of them in the end of youth, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and amends the broken bone from any part of all similar causes to glue, in which there is thickening that adheres and strengthens it together with conglutination and liation together, in which come the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, and from no cause do you prohibit it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to place foods on the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fracture according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will briefly recall all types of fracture, explained in their own chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Various types of fracture within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fracture in the bone are diversified; for some fractures occur as arcs, while others happen at the joints. Some fractures occur along the length of the bone: such as those from the pressure that causes writing to be prepared, fractures by slicing and disrupting the head, and small fissure-like fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each case, there is a specific method or torment proper in restoring it according to the distinct recall of them in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this, the bone fracture is known: there is a tortuosity of it, and an elevation and prominence of it in sensation, and its pain when you press upon it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is neither obvious tortuosity nor pain, you should make your touch felt when you press on the bone with some agitation, and if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If it is possible that it is tortuosity or a small fissure, touch it with your hand and apply compression fully; pause over it while using the medicines from which you recall at that moment what fits the place; and then proceed straight by subtlety.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And observe that the place when it is arched and does not split into two or another such thing that does not happen in its extent, as if everything of its composition is inflamed; then you should begin your correction from this point with the understanding that an apostema (inflammation) will occur.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs, let that be for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and puncturing of it is lighter than the place where the accident occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the memory of it that will come.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you find it, then when there is a necessary extension of this broken member into two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position such that you extend the parts of the broken member according to its natural figure, while the fragments are spread out from the broken member, then force yourself to return those additions with skill and according to any method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And see to it that your strength does not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and force yourself according to your power to place one bone next to its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess to occur due to their operations or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen from their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, achieve equilibrium and a proper operation of that member, providing rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make sure they do not feel pain during their waking hours and while sleeping, observe their revolution and agitation, and direct their excretion, and all their movements with your entire virtue; wait until the position of the member is in a position where the pain is secured, for which cause is that when it is in the disposition of the position of the member, there is pain or injury; then ensure you change that to another disposition where they do not feel pain; and keep in mind that the position of the member should be straight and equal, so that when it is restored, no tortuosity occurs in the member.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is what I report; so that you may know that the broken limbs vary in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and resemble each other, note that the wrapping should be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, note that in those the wrapping should be broad and hard, for the broad band connects the large and strong limb from all parts at the fracture equally, ensuring that no blemish enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after your first application of the bandage, pause sufficiently and conveniently over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to which limb it is; and keep your hand a little firm on the bandaging.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part above the place of the fracture, and keep your hand firm so that your bandage is not looser than where you have tightened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then slightly extend the covering of the fracture area, and gradually soften the tension little by little, during which time take from that place a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the wounded area over the covering, and gradually adjust the coverings to the part of the fracture; and let your operation be on the tension of the covering and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first covering above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place stops or folds of cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is equalized, if there is any curvature; otherwise, do not stop at any point for this reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place on the other bandage, and gradually equalize over these coverings, properly made as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area; otherwise, place on what is the abscess there and which causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the coverings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the coverings be of thick cane wood, well formed; or of oak bark; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each covering be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is both thicker and a little longer than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to what is read regarding the member's size and smallness; then strengthen around the strips with another bandage according to your first tension; and place some honey above decently as we said about tension, and it should be your tension more in that area, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the tension.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and subtlety, and be of fine quality; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where flax threads were used for suturing the wound, it is a great error when tensioning the suture to an equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to tension them to achieve what you want, and it must be that there is no more than a finger's width between the bandages.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the ends of the strips near the tension in those areas, then place some padding of sheepskin or dyed wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fractures occur due to a blow, and damage to the chain occurs, and I will recall this in the Capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for any broken limb, it is not straightened with braces on the first day; for this cause, when the limb, if large, does not allow you to place it on braces immediately but after about 3 or 7 days, or more, according to your safety of the onset of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is applied to that upon which no heat or friction is used: and it is that you take powder of millstone, which is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus as described, but sift it with flour of wheat, and use the preparation not too thick nor too fine; and then proceed with it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, dragon's blood, acacia, fennel, and myrrh, which is extracted from wild milfoil, all in drachms x; myrrh and aloes in drachms v; alcohol in drachms xx; all to be ground, sifted, and mixed with alcohol or egg white if the wound of the patient is open; then use this plaster, good in composition, for it restores lightly broken bones and you may apply it to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering which restores fractures and sprains: take myrrh and half a drachm of white hyssop in drachms x; of myrrh and aloes in drachms v; of acacia in drachms vi; of Armenian bole in drachms .xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All to be ground in a mortar with the contrary ingredient, then sifted, and mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and for alleviating accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take virgin wool and submerge it in vinegar and cooked oil, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster there is virtue of restoration, of cautery application and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of plaster to restore fractures: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Another short method of plaster to restore fractures and when you want the resolution of an abscess: take roots of althea, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, farina de ers; mix all parts together and steep them in wine; apply it to the limb if it is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is scalded, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger method of plaster for resolution, different from the previous one: when you encounter an abscess that resists, to restore the limb, take roots of althea and seeds of flax, safflower, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile; mix all parts together and steep them in water of sorrel or water of two colors or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of the wound.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the limb immersed one should restore it rather a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Galen observe that it should be placed over the limb broken one should restore it and the causes in which there is drying of little quality such as myrrh, resin, and similar to them among those causes we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cedrus, of human skin cut open orazel pen, and of althea, and salt; crush them thoroughly, sift them, pound them, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you should crush the paste and then dissolve it be that you consider whether pain nor swelling has occurred and if the bone is not broken does not move from its place, then do not remove it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain intense or swelling or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should cauterize or remove it immediately, and apply the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a sponge of wet marine sponge, and submerge that in clear water, and with that wash the area until that pain subsides; then place the limb at rest for an hour; then place over it lamb's wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and bind it overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and that the swelling of the limb has rested, and the pain in it has diminished.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that fine stricture and plaster a little and do not strengthen your first construction, but keep it subtle until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the other accidents have already subsided, and there is no need for plaster and stricture, then apply that in the same way as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause affects the limb among those we have said, then do not remove that for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears by the slitting of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust more tightly than in your first grip to the constriction, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to whether there is a previous recollection of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the place of the fracture is already dried and exhausted more than it should, then perceive that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that area with fresh water for a full day and do this every three days; and slightly loosen the constriction, and by this operation supply the nutrient to the member, and it will be healed lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And what the fracture restorers do another time when the member is not restored to its beginning state, according to the condition, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and a great fear; if they were rightly doing this, they would have enlarged the Ancients' books on their own and accomplished this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that they do not do this.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are motas, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, which breaks the bone completely through the cartilage, leaving the bone like this in the wood, and for this reason, this species is named ascial; or the blow cuts part of the bone, and cuts into the flesh but does not pass beyond the surface of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the swelling of these two kinds of fractures is either great or small, and the friction fracture; its cause is a blow with a stick or a fall on a stone, and they resemble this.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which nearly reaches the periosteum where the bone is located; or it is in the surface of the bone, and the swelling of these two kinds of fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for this fracture, the bone is weakened in its fine hairiness, and for this reason, this species of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by compression or by the strike of a stone, which causes some layer of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave place as happens with the metal pans when struck and is part of their entry into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most often this occurs in the bodies of wet bones, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And to all these species of closed fractures, they are painful as if by separate stabs.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the recollection of all this at its location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we can recognize all these species of fracture by observation and by inquiry about the pain and the sign of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known because it is discovered on the bone, is scraped, and limits on it with a probe, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning with the symptoms of illness, and if you see by these symptoms that it signifies manifestly by its meaning fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the eyes and redness of those, and resemblance to them of symptoms in major disorders, then you may doubt that it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter accidents not common, then hope for recovery, when you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the cause is that if the patient has come to you at the beginning of the inflammation as it is inflamed and this is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bone tissue on the day four according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having that what is left of the bone be corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces, then consider that you insert the fractured piece, rubbing it, as I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you examine the thigh of the injured patient, and uncover over the bone according to custom and your method as possible based on the shape of the wound, and let it be light over the thigh.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess caut, then you apply yourself to it with what is convenient, and you fill the place with wrappings infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess be quieted, and you are sure of flows of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in the incision of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor of straight edge, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more the incisor more lateral than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And ensure that you have the number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and are at the rear end of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their ease in percussion over the incisions to prevent them from trembling and leading that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, first drill in the circuit of it before you make incisions with needles, which you call non-deep needles.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called so, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone's length to what is near it, in order that the needle has a round extremity or edge resembling a small margin or circle, which you prevent from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these needles, each suitable for the thickness of each bone, ensuring that in all parts of the skull, the extremity of each is sharp, and the length and shortness in quantity be according to the thickness of that bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three types of needles: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, move the needle to another location, pausing where all of the thickness of the ray or environment is reached.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with a scalpel what is between each tooth of the bone, and make that thin pus above it at the end of levitation, as we have said, within which you remove the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And see that you be careful so that the scalpel does not touch any nerve of the head.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And then, after you have circled the bone and separated it from the head if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted that, be sure to scrape and smooth that area with the roughness of what is in the bone using another instrument similar to a scalpel, but importantly be sure that it is finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you remove any small part of the bones and scrape, then take that with ease using one of the instruments; and then cure the wound with linen and ointment, which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which divides Gaulia and lays it out with great laud; this is its manner: at the beginning you must necessarily start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand gently but joyfully on the end of this incisive instrument, which is of this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is lion and you do not incise any cause, and the acute part is divided into two cuts forward in length, thus as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the chin against the face of the acute part incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisive part with a small hammer as you incise the entire bone, thus as it is turned, and you be sure of the panniculus that it does not accede in any accident that you fear in any way; and if the medicant14 was the most fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a rupture occurs in any part of the bone in certain areas of the thigh, it will incise that part at the extremity of the incised lenticular one, and deliver that part with ease, for it is relieved of its damage and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the muscle, and what is severed or remains from the bone is its surface, and it is rough and fine inequalities, then you must scrape that roughness away and eradicate those fine inequalities with your sharp razor, according to which you have prepared various quantities so that you can administer of them all the most convenient parts for their application and use correctly in accordance with where you are operating on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer according to your judgment, using the coarser part of the razor at the beginning, and then use more of its fine part, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick part and the fine part of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small fractures or fine fractures, you must administer care according to where you are directing the correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not accustomed to doing so for all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place yourself on what we have written, as we showed in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is torn when you extract the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, submerge it in olive oil, and place it over the wound's opening; then take another folded or triple-folded cloth, submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one, doing this gently enough that you do not weigh down on the dressing. And administer a plaster of lead over it, but do not press too hard onto the wound according to its size.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess. Then remove it and administer medicines that require additional dryness, such as linseed and wheat bran, and powders of thyme and arsenic, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make these medicines into a powder that is dusted over the wound, such as when it is dry; generally, administer to it any medicine of a nature that will cleanse and not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard that in your treatment the wound in your cure be clean; and do not leave it surdyce of ointment or another; nor let virulence be added to it; for when adjusted over the brain cloth, corrupt that and spoil it, and accide on the patient nearby this malign evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the face of the head, as from it the bones are changed and especially when the cure is neglected, and a blackness appears on the surface; and therefore consider when it affects the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for him.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackness occurs but from the medicine that is applied, and it is due to that medicine causing the blackness, then take part of honey and part of rubbed olive oil in equal parts, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the face; and cure it with the species of cure that you deem appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third chapter.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken from the nose but two parts together more overable, or one of those few times, because in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and is not broken, and you do not damage it but friction and tortuosity and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside according to your finger's indication, and outside, between the finger and the nose bone, so that the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you to facilitate the operation, and guard that it does not become inflamed as a result of your procedure on the patient in pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the more overable part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you must equalize it at the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And quickly have the patient restored to their position on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or eighth day, give them rest from the apstema caut.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a wad of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two wicks, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the wicks should be soaked in honey, and replaced throughout the day, but this is not seen by me; instead, let the wad be soaked in honey wax powdered with flour; and leave the wick until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a wick, a hot cloth wrapped in linen cloth; and this is when the nasal fracture is very severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use wicks.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster on the nose with wax or a cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or with a pessary.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame flour and powder of dried thyme mixed with honey; then place your hand over the swelling, and do not touch the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, when you need to split those, extract them with instruments suitable for those; then close the incision, treat that with what encases and consolidates, and use plasters as appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a plague occurs inside the nose, when you need to treat that with washes and administer lead pipes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not open, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two pieces but bent inward, in which case the perception is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the left index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and push the swelling of the fracture inward with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly so that it goes well.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts according to straightness so that the alignment of the bone is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the loosening of teeth along with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect will break at the edge of gold or silver or copper; and place a hot cautery over the broken jaw, place one over the doubled cloth, and place another over the large star-shaped stake made decently, or a single piece equal in length to the jaw; and tie it above as appropriate for your ligature and the application, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to take rest and peace, and abstain from his usual meals for a while.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then you should change it on the seventh day; and then correct what has already been altered in him and plaster it with powder of alum, or with chalk of oak, or with flour of bran, but that you have previously applied his cerote, and place a lion's skin over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once this plaster is applied and adjusted to him, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, without changing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for major fractures heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the cooling of him until it is healed, and expel that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is open, then consider whether it is a severe separation of the bone or a displacement, and then you should carefully align those displacements with what you have done in the removal of those from the muscles.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds' openings are wide, then you must enlarge them according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And shortly after you have completed those stages, and there will be no more bleeding from those wounds; then, if the wound is large, you must enlarge it; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suit this over it and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcule when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the scapula is fractured, in the part facing forward, you should break the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is fractured, separated, or completely broken into two parts without involving stages, the restoration is easier. If such incidents occur with stages, the restoration is more difficult. Or when the fracture occurs through a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is through a wound, is that you have two ministers present, so one holds the assistant and guides the broken scapula, and the other extends the neck at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then equalize the fracture at the ties said between where the form of it is made according to how it should be, and not on its prominence too little or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then when you place the patient's limb on a pillow or cloth, let it be the size according to your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and press the pillow with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the extremity of the fork to the parts outward, because it is obstructed by the bone, then let the patient be laid on his side on a pillow, and place a medium-sized cushion on the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the surgeon presses the muscle on the parts until the bone of the fork is elevated to the bone, and then you realign the fracture and equalize it at the ties said.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel the fibers of the fork and they are loose, then cut over that and remove those fibers easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the scalpel blades you have prepared for this, after placing a fork as a support under the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is either of wood or of iron, of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width depends on what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two extremities thus like this, and one extremity should be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the piece from the bone is wide, and there is a certainty of abscess formation, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the extent of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then fill a cloth with warm oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone structure is fractured and bleeding has stopped, you should pause to apply a plaster made from flour of wheat meal mixed with honey, place it over the area, and then cover it. If needed, use a long strip of linen about the width of a palm or slightly less; then sprinkle powder over the plaster and the area. Take a thin tableware stick, about three fingers in width and length similar to that; wrap this in cloth, then wrap the cloth with the stick over the location of the fracture. Continue applying heat as before, but rotate it around the neck of the wound, keeping the healthy side intact, and reduce it over all parts, repeating the application until the bone structure of the fracture is properly set, ensuring that this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always ensure that the stick is not pressing on the broken bone; thus, you should check the wound daily, as when the lint becomes moist or you see the stick no longer pressed tightly, then you adjust and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and support their neck so that during sleep at night a small cushion is placed under it; thus raising the assistant's hand towards the wound of that side, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm on the side is laid against the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an accident in the same place or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see its face turn to that, and adjust it to the stricture and restore it, and leave the fracture of the furcula to be restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the need in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The splint is broken in the middle of the wound and not broken from the wound itself, but at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner which is possible to you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powder of ground album of wheat and stoped lion over the area; and then place粉末的撒布量应根据汤匙的大小，或者多一些。根据桌子侧面的薄片，适量撒上。
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if you leave the slice concave in some of the areas of the spoon, then level that concavity with stoped lion, and then place the slice according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen the flesh above with good suturing and ensure the slice is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the healing on each day; and every time it becomes softened, ligate again and strengthen and equalize the slice if it is displaced from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and you know for sure that it is from which bones where the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the bone to the ligament, then place a hook there, and cut over it, and hold it as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an apostematous cautery, if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends move and tend to become united and healed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle decline towards the inner parts and cause great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting; these are evident in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that it should be resupinated on its back, and a cushion is placed between its shoulders; then press on its muscles, adjust its spine against the ribs, and be subtle in your operation and alignment according to every manner that is possible and suitable, so that the figure of the bone returns as much as it can.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and lay a thin layer of wax or salve over it, similar in lightness to how you wrap it in cloth; then be subtle in placing that over the broken bone so it is not too thick; and go around the back several times, making sure it is tightly but decently secured; and consider the bandage at all times, strengthening it when it becomes softened.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes a swelling or pus, or pain, or abscess to occur in that place, then you should incise or probe it, or relieve the pain, or remove the abscess that has occurred there. When you do so, remove the bandage and eradicate the plaster, and correct what has occurred by the method of healing; then reduce the plaster if the swelling persists, and adjust its tightness until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in large spaces between them; and at their ends at the front part, such contact does not cause fracture since they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire about it with your fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done by equalizing the fracture with your fingers according to the possible manner, ensuring it is fitted as it should be, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring at the inner sides, then it causes severe pain and puncture-like sensation in the patient, similar to the pain that occurs when something has pierced them. For this reason, you place a cloth over the bone; and it results in difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to spasm; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say that by placing food in the patient's mouth that causes inflammation and swelling, the belly will become swollen and extended, and the fracture will be pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle; and if it does happen, then aid the patient.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the windpipe and near where pus will form with strength; this seems like a reasonable argument, but nevertheless, it is feared that the windpipe might carry the superfluities to that place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the area with wool that has been submerged in oil, and let it be packed with powder between the ribs until it is full, ensuring the dressing fits snugly as you wrap it according to the shape; and treat the patient with therapy involving food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is violently constrained causing pain which they cannot endure, and you make a puncture in the skin with the blade to relieve it, fear for the patient, then cut over the place, uncovering from the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which retains the flaps, the memory of which precedes, and incise the bone with facility, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess happens inside, then incise and insert powder in rosin oil and place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be dressed over the lint on which they sleep, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine in the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, when fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then apply friction and similar treatments to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their pulse is already softened, numbed, dead, unable to grow, extend, or strengthen those areas. And when you constrain them with ropes or poke them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you should know that they are not cured, and under such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in them when constrained with ropes and poked with a needle, then you should know that the bone socket is saved and that the gout will heal by cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you feel along the spine of the neck and want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider the pulse in their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you feel that they are already softened, then feel along those areas where the pulse in the hands has changed, and closely observe their breathing and digestion according to their will, and sometimes they may be lifted onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and then do not attempt to cure them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for it is that you need to cauterize for the anesthesia of the abscess caut which you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or with pieces of hot cloth; place it over that area for several minutes each day until the abscess is numbed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and apply a poultice over it; and command the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he finds pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that there is pain in the joint or any cause already separated from it, then you must cauterize the tendon and hold that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, sew them if it is large; and treat that with some red ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is near the knee, then you must insert the little finger of your left hand into the buttock, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible through second intention; and then place a plaster and bandage over it, if you need those, and treat that area.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken stages in it, then work on that, stop the bleeding, and treat the wound with the cure that comes after it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of health.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and is inscribed in their length, declining towards the inner parts; and accidents such as pain occur in the area and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over it while it is at the location of the fracture, which is the figure of the leg.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the leg, then you align that part according to what appears to you by symmetry until it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the middle or has already declined towards the inner parts, then you apply pressure to the leg's belly while preparing for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, then place the wooden or copper rod over that, and tightly bind the area without fearing puncturing for fracture or removal of the rod.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the cavity so that it fills the area where the hernia will be reduced according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs during the operation, stop the extension of the incision and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Then place something over it to sedate it as previously described; then return to the restoration of the incision and tightly bind it as usual.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if bones in the area are fractured or comminuted, then set them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the coracoid process and the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a piece of large leather according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And attach two threads at the ends, and then suspend it from the elevated area.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a mat; then throw its broken arm over the leather so that it reaches the midline of the area where the curvature of the leather is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And place it over something heavy or let the servant extend it to the sides. Then the doctor, while holding the fracture with his hands, do so together until the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is to place the patient supine on their back and suspend the neck with a thread; then command two servants: one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the lower part. Each of them extends to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the fracture with one splint and another with another splint, and each of the two attendants stretch on their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the splint on the tendon and leave the other part over the fracture, securing it well.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the joint, then place the splint at that location and over that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and once it is equalized as it should be through good application, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then leave the dressing for five days, and place over the sewn woolen bandage seven fresh and rubbed olive leaves until the abscess has had time to rest, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a linen bandage around the plaster; and adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of support, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint according to the break, with the length of the splints according to the break plus three digits in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then firmly place the splints at the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And ensure that your bandage over the location of the fracture is tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, use a looser bandage.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then leave the string and stakes within for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no accident happens at the place of pricking or inflammation; or is forbidden food to reach the member by disposition of excess of string; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will happen, then do not release the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's hands be on their back, and their feet on the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the support cushion filled with wool accordingly. Consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not altered, or that the ligament is not softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide food to the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts strengthening; then gradually increase the amount of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days is customarily the time for the leg and the thigh to be strengthened; then it should be loosened and a bath should be given, and an ointment should be applied which will heal it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is healed by attrition, then you do not loosen it with ligaments and wires over one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; the former is small and is that which we call the little bone, while the latter is large and supports the other from below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the large bone is broken alone, or the small one, and if they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fracture of the leg is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse when two long bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller tibia, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, allowing a slight extension to facilitate its alignment.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger tibia is broken, then you must allow greater extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both tibiae are broken together, then you must allow greater traction more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand in such a way to restore the bone and extend it lying on a cushion, while keeping the wrist of the hand above, more so than the others, and the auricular finger below the other fingers, and the thigh on a sloping bench.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of it in the upright position, so that the thigh does not further work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his hand or on linen, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the physician sets the bone in place and reduces it according to the best form that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must reduce the entire piece to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate fragment that cannot be reduced to your satisfaction in the restoration of the bone, then you set it in place and reduce it according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is comminuted, I have already treated this separately, and therefore take up the treatment of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your reduction, then you apply a linen cloth moistened with a mixture of olive oil and white wax, making it moderate in thickness, and tightly wrap the area around the abscess to allow it to drain; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powder of mustard seed with honey, and place a bandage over it; let the bandage be placed slightly above and more firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of ribs in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one limb or two limbs together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your grip firmly and vigorously over the location of the fracture. When the grip is strongest on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts, place it a little more tightly according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The string with which it is tied should be strong linen, finely mixed between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as is often the case with what happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be bound until it has rested, and then return the grip.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction is already softened and the bone is already mended and resembles those, then correct all this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have said occur, then you must wait approximately 20 days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the hand of the patient over its virtue of agitated movements, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or more gently in 28 days, and all this depends on the complexity and disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers to heal a fracture, do not damage them but rub with visible grains.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, ensure that the patient remains lying down and extends the limb for one hundred seconds according to equality, and then place your hand over the extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then extend the broken bones and the doctor must ensure that they are set with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the rupture is within the parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a pocket of cloth, and command the patient to hold that tightly with their ruptured palm; then have them hold it firmly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And place the candle on cloth which is elevated, so that the body is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the broken part in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if your hand were turned to the wrist between the fingers with sand.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small splint above it so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where the fracture is; or bind them all continuously, which is better; or place a small splint above it, as we have said for the tip.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cautery and opposition — during your operation — according to what you see when an accident occurs from those causes, as described repeatedly in this text.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone fractured in several places and the pain is felt according to how it is displaced anteriorly and posteriorly.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on his back and facing upwards.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister stretches the ligament along its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is stretched to the side of the hip, then the ligament is extended along the outer side of the femur, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is on the outer side, then the ligament is stretched along the femur, and the extension to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to infect the limb with an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you leave it alone for a few days until the abscess can be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to remove any excess; then wrap the bandage so that it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the fracture at the divisions left, so that the ends of the needle extend well beyond both parts, then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh with what excess of the bandage you have.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place something on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the contraction may be constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong contraction of the muscle over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, the less your contraction should be finer and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the ligament to the parts where it will reach the foot cavity, and strengthen both ends of the splints from the other side to prevent the ligament from being displaced from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the contraction over that, so as not to injure the limb with cauterization or emphysema resembling those; and if any of these causes occur, then apply the appropriate treatment for it, and correct what has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so if in the bone it is worse at the place where it puts on, then you should equalize that as much as possible; and if not, treat it and keep it immobilized, and cure what precedes the remembrance of this until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by making it fit to the stiles, as we said in the assistant and·on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But still in the restoration done in such a manner no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or if the other leg is applied, then it is necessary that the other one limps.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in about ten days or a few more weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ankle.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the ankle occurs less frequently, but it often happens more than once or twice with an injury.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if a fracture does occur, it is often just a crack or a break in its parts, and this can be one or several cracks, and over this, the sensation is always present.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be made equal to what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equality, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and press over that round stencil, if you need it; and strengthen above at the structure to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for an abscess, cauterize and examine those that are applied to any accident at what is convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the flanks.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the flanks there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named after the flanks; and the other is thin and is named fragile.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of the species of fracture occur to these bones as they occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, its restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if you need to break a finer bone, the joint is dislocated in all directions forward.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if you need to break a thicker bone, you find the fracture, and it is one of those causes that are not under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, elevation, and ligature of the veins according to this method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the joint fracture is loose with visible spots, let the extension be milder and more gentle, and alleviate it with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you align the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a fir tree which are placed under the causes that are stopped in tendons, and make them thusly from palm branches; leave those with little thickness, but not too thick like the thickest, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and place them inside the joint.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the top of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be positioned under the foot's base location.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two supports at three points of the extremities and in the middle point, for at this structure the foot is forbidden to lean to the right or left side, and is kept in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a brass strap is applied according to the length of the foot; and the foot is placed in it so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And you should especially do this in fractures, and when that is inflamed properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the foot on each day and study it carefully, and guard it from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then apply this treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the tibia and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Of the tibia, it does not fracture completely; more often fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and few fractures occur in the toes of the foot, and do not fracture but are treated on those in proper condition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated over each other, then the patient places his foot on prepared ground in this manner.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated from those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place a plaster and bandage over it, and place the belly of the foot on a small table with two supports.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen the bandage on the foot with structure properly placed, for you have wrapped that bandage with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are broken or are displaced, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some say they are broken, then restore those, and set them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger in a splint according to the length of the finger, and slightly above it. Then lay the hand on this table which you have already prepared, and bind it with a bandage properly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone in a splint according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and standing on one of the ends of the table, make a hole in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes that we have mentioned to you in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause there for what concerns this.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis and the scrotum of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, make that incision in the cutaneous wound, and then incline it slightly towards the side of the fracture behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the thigh with something soft, and does so in the thigh as she wishes; and then the woman is shaken gently, and her legs are raised little by little, for all this must be done carefully until the thigh is in the right place and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her legs, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the soft part to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return to that position according to the method by which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a swine bladder and strengthen it with thread around the anus a cannula of cane; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity of the patient, and blow through the cannula to infuse virtue into the bladder so that it becomes inflated inside the cavity, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with pus and left for some days according to our recommendation, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and needle therapy of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that occur rarely, especially to him who has some study and experience and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major judicial dispositions in the restoration and contraction of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the scrotum of a man when it is fractured, protect it from infection, and place the scrotum in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, and let it be wrapped up, and leave it for three days or around that time, until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to use that which you apply when a fracture is displaced, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should then set and bloodlet that area frequently, as the conditions for bloodletting are present, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement flows pus, then cover that which you set with retention to see if you sprinkle it with safflower. If another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	More so if an abscess does occur, then you leave the restoration until the ninth day, after the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with some ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not at your readiness and the equalization with your hands is not easy, then you reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends at its extremities; and be thicker at the bottom, and thinner in the middle.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labre volontz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the patient be elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it all at once into the place where the bone returns, and let it be equal to some standard.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is fine and does not take that tool for a good exception, then you must introduce the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone altogether as we have recommended, then incise it with those instruments which we have mentioned; it will be that with one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then clean the bone of roughness and small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient finds intense pain in the area, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar tied with a black string, and properly in summer, and do not stay over the wound too long or any other cause which might be oil, so that it does not happen reddening and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the time of the full moon after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered until it begins to heal, using scissors and applying dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution not to irritate the wound with the fracture, for many times doctors have caused these leaves to inflame the patient's illnesses or bring about a fatal corruption or severe illness, which would be unwise.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the lunar phase is light, moist, different from the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in that area, then do not stay over those points too long. Instead, apply cloth pads instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days have passed since the wound has started to fester, where a boil has been generated, then lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and immediately apply calms, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat wounds, thus applying tetra-pharmcon and similar to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should loosen the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that suppuration flows from it to the areas where you have facilitated this.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the boil been discharged from it, then you should suspect that here are signs of gout, and you must examine the wound by puncturing it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs that are separated, extract them. Those from which nothing is extracted and cause the member to become painful, forcibly incise them as much as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you notice pus or bad odor in the wound, it is stioma or another species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must place there what is appropriate for the treatment of such conditions, as there is a preceding narration of the cure in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this place where the main sore is located, you should make present your hand: when the flesh is cut, lift over the member as the flesh of the thigh and of the helper and resemble those of the large members, and do not presume too much of it, nor the extraction of it, for many spots seen to happen by this there will be death; having left that which can rot, for strong decay will fall on its own in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of a hernia that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Spots seen this hernia occurs in the vicinity of bone healing, and especially close to the joints, and alter the shape of the member; and strongly prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the hernia is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, enemas, and observe, examine closely, and compare them; try taking some of these or all, and confirm whether they are astringent, or white from urine, or sweet, and place them on the hernia in cloth, and constrain them over it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the constriction in place so that you do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and put another one on, while the knot is being loosened; or strengthen the lead sheet hanging down, as lead has the property of tightening whatever is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot is already in the vein and tightened, and necessity demands that you loosen it, then split it along its uppermost part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or lance it with a hot iron while the knot is being loosened; and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of fractures, when restored and then the limb is reduced according to its natural position.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb is reduced and set according to its natural position, this is done for several reasons: one reason is the abundance of fluid in the joint and the setting not being done as it should; or due to excess constriction of the ligaments while nutrition cannot flow to the limb; or due to excessive application of ointment; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to insufficient strength in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the heart of the patient tender while the scab multiplies within it; administer baths; and intermingle hope and joy with it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the moistening with strong wine, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced in a tortuous manner, prohibit the operation on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is already reduced near the completion of its reduction and stabilization of the broken bone and setting, and this is due to the form of the member, but still the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of someone who thinks that part of the member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is much reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in a mixture of sheep's milk in which you have put softening herbs such as hyssop, rue, melilot, similar to those; and prepare a poultice with such a poultice to soften it well; or use mucilage of rue and mix it with gauze or oil of cinnamon, applying it as a poultice; or use fat figs and roast them in dove's dung, resembling those mentioned among the medicines for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes it is dissolved by gentle friction applied to the more humid parts, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already gone on for some time and becomes strong, turning into a stone, and requires treatment, then it is necessary to remove the pus above the cecum and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and incise what is superfluous from the nodulation of that method on the bone with fine scissors, and facilitate it in that area by stimulating and studying it.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol.xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that particular place, making it forbidden to move, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is essential to act quickly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area can become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should neither be cut nor stretched during the time of gangrene, for moist wounds cause spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More importantly, when this happens, you should immediately perform a flap surgery on the foot, and allow it to rest until the gangrene subsides; then, the limb should be soaked in warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member be treated with water of which the memory will bring to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first down to the part last.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated and not reduced; and the dislocation of both is made according to one of two manners: either they are slightly moved from their places and slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated, in which case they must be thoroughly reduced at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and cannot open or close his mouth, and the patient's tongue should be wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place in major movements due to little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then you must administer a gentle reduction, and not delay it entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and place the doctor's thumb from one hand in the recess of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he place both his thumbs together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside to support them; and command the patient to cease moving his jaws and bring those out from any part back to their proper place; and the doctor should align the jaw and push it back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powders of cloth with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and soon apply something to facilitate the ligatures with many bands.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not swell on either the right or the left; and do not force him to gargle for any reason; having his food forbidden until the pains subside and his jaws are relaxed, then allow what he wishes.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered with ease, and you should not interfere with the appetite for eating and drinking or spitting, until his jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated for some time and not returned to their proper places causes fever and continuous swelling, and a strong pain in the abdomen of the patient, as well as severe vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and severe swelling may occur to the one upon whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the leg inward by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and equalized according to what we have said and according to what is within your means.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and perform an extraction, commanding the patient to maintain calm and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the Reduction of Muscle Dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any manner but according to three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called taut; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most dislocated and outwardly displaced at the rear parts of the tendon, especially in those where the flesh is scanty, slightly being dislocated; more so in those where there are more muscles, with greater difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes such cases occur in certain individuals due to a blow or collision, and the muscle of the person develops an abscess from a carbuncle, which is exacerbated because it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover what you are particularly over them with, and proceed in the cure of them.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	When the dislocation is in the shoulder parts, you must feel for slips; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find to have a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity, and by feeling for the slip at the head of the muscle it should sound like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor raise it with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must feel the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear sensation, which is not vague.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is unconscious.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's foot to above the parts; then places his fingers on the slips and feels for the slip, raising the joint with strength at its proper place, and the minister raises the patient's foot, extending it properly; then places his fingers there so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, it does not return through what we have said and only from the beginning of the dislocation accident, for several days, then the patient should be bathed in cold water and a wet compress that alleviates and soothes should be applied as if it were roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid on their back and placed in such a way that the tilt of the body is equal between levitation and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the spine, elevates the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient to prevent it from being twisted, while another attends to the head of the patient, preventing it from being twisted, for then it quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you make someone present who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of the affected limb, and inserts his muscle beneath the tilt of the patient's foot, elevating the tilt of the patient upwards between the limbs so that the patient is suspended in air, while another attends to pull the foot of the patient from the sides of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then that which another cause is suspended, so that the serious one may return quickly, for the dislocation returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	But it is reduced by another manner: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long pole whose head is round in shape, like a mortar handle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place the patient so that their head rests on the head of the pole; next, cover the top of the pole with lion skins, and let the patient lie along the length of the pole. Extend the hand of the other part towards the divisions below; and extend the body of the patient from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two braccia, its width is four fingers, and its thickness is augmented in the palm of your hand according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place lion skins on the round head of the pole so that the pole does not slide off the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head, and stretch your hand or arm along the body between the parts, and tie the body and the arm and the extremity of the hand to an assistant.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and stretch the hand along the parts below, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for it is completed according to any manner that is possible, and then place beneath the head a pillow of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared of powder of molten wax and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed on top, and then tightly bind the head with something decent; the plaster be thoroughly applied over the plaster, and the hand thereof be attached to its neck, and let it be left, and do not move the hand from it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the food of the patient is moderate, until the limb is comforted, for it is then more easily healed.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then more food should be given about seven or five times a day and exercise should be performed; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to frequent attacks of humidity or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be applied three times, as stated in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced several times over but still not closed with a catgut suture, and the arm cannot be raised above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of what is caused, you should reduce the foot and calf or the parts behind, the reduction is done by impulse and extension by the muscles, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other stricture, and care that within it be healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the delay in healing is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol.xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, especially向前方和后方。当肩关节脱位时，你能够明显看到关节的凹陷，无论是在迅速查看还是在触摸时根据关节脱位的具体形状来判断。当你复位脱位的肩膀时，这关节的位置就很明显了，因为关节是凹陷的，无法弯曲手臂，也不能触及自己的肌肉。
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And note the symptoms, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed. For if it becomes inflamed with an abscess, reduction is difficult, and even strong medicine may not cure it completely; especially when it occurs in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the patient, when it is that which can be reduced, is that the patient's hand be extended between two others, and the doctor's arm be stretched out, with the doctor's hands on the knees and let go, and he push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in front parts, then return it thus by bending the hand against its own, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous manipulation.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not remauged during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then let the arm be rotated completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint vigorously as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity, place it on that cushion where there is a pad and evacuation with white oil, and extend it by stretching downward, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and so if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the plaster and the ligament, and leave it there for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if accidents happen to it shortly after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, so it is a matter of rapid movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then immerse that in the bath; and when it is soaked, then rub the joint with mild friction, and then apply it over that for a while, so it is a matter of rapid movement, once, and the second, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and weathered crack and press strongly against it; do this several times, for that is wet and you are reducing it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is necessary to act with great speed in the reduction when it occurs, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and have them extend their arm. The surgeon then places their hand or palm over the area near the joint and gently push it back into its proper location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But firstly it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places both hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, place both hands, then the position of the hand of the physician intrinsically on the table, so that the physician's hand falls over that vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns soon, that is good; and if not, then strengthen the area by applying pressure to the abscess and leave it as it is; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor allowed to proceed with the reduction of the dislocation for several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But according to the tortuosity of the joint; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and in this case it should be strengthened with a cautery near the site and reinforce it with some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the swelling has returned, place it on the poultice which we have recommended, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; then loosen it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement in it has been overstayed and some gravity occurs in it, then apply that which is water cauda and with friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	For some time, dislocate the fingers completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its center, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, ligature that according to that narration, and do not cease to release and exercise it during the day. Ligature it at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as though you do this, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and join that to that part, and do this your first operation, within which it be healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as though you do this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the cervical spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When the vertebrae of the back or the neck are fully dislocated, and several vertebrae around that location are displaced, then there is no cure for that, for death will ensue to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; several times, parts of their body or their legs or one of their arms become soft; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for several times are displaced and multiple divisions are made to remove those dislocations in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is mended at the rear parts and is named gilblowitz.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider if the gilblowitz arises from puella, then in that case there is neither cure nor does it heal completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those which come from congelation or percussion or semblance to those, the Ancients have spoken of the methods of cure at length, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I will now abbreviate that of which the slight omission from excess of that, for my proximity to the clarity of my exposition, which I have here expounded and formed from various instruments, by which I will show and expand that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gilblowitz that arises from the front part at the feet, neither cure nor healing occurs; similarly in that which arises at two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that arises in the two sides is cured as I advise.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient be extended on his back close to the wall, and be covered with a wet cloth so that his feet are not chilled.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stake, planted in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stake on the sides of the feet at the other end of the stake.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister hold the stake, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and tie tightly with a strong linen band; extend the end of the bandage to the stake which is at the head of the patient, and tie that there; and tie the other bandage tightly around the hips of the patient under his buttocks, and support his legs; and adjust all the bandages and tie those to the other stake which supports his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the stake, and do not move both stakes and the bandages in which they are fixed, but they should not be fixed in this manner as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the breadth or length is about three braccia, and dig in the wall where we said was near the wound a place at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end. He presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a hole in the buttock which is revolved with your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one braccia, and place his head at the heel of two sticks in the same manner; and let the distance between each stick be a palm. Then put something through each hole to turn the spine, and secure each end firmly on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round stick for the hole, and it should be turned in the two slots of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a slot in which the stick is inserted, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have pulled in the feet of the patient in the slot where you place their head, and the ligaments you have pulled in the thighs of the patient in the hole where you place their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each hole for a minister to hold the hole with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the hole:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; then place a slice of table wax over the paste, such that its width is about three fingers or nearly those, and its length is sufficient to cover the part of the spine, and on top of that portion of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the paste which we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger in the area at the end of the healing, then ensure that medicines that mitigate and soothe are administered through long-term use, which we have recommended; and already a layer of lead has been applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes accidents occur at the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone where you already foresee that no suspicion should arise about it with this medicine, for it would make your accident fatal.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure for a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only occur through dislocation alone, and do not happen in those cases where small displacement and凹陷 occurs in other joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And primarily it is dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that, when you adjust the healthy leg's knee against the malformed one, the malformed leg appears longer and the kneecap is more prominent than the healthy side. The malformed leg cannot bend its knee; instead, it must be stretched out. This is the place where a cauterization of the apostema is applied, so that the head of the malformation is already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one who suffers dislocation to the external parts is that the symptoms of the condition are contrary to this dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one who suffers dislocation to the anterior parts is that the knee swells according to the complement, but it cannot bend the part that is in pain. If forced to extend further towards the anterior parts, it cannot do so; and his urine is retained, and his swelling is an apostema. You must treat his mobility on the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one upon whom you have dislocated the parts behind is that he does not expand the groin, nor can that in front be bent which bends the one behind, and his thigh is shorter than the other, and the one behind is softened, and the hip bone is displaced at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at once, if the dislocation is old and ancient, whether it has already hardened. If so, you administer the reduction according to its position as soon as possible; in such cases, this is not part of the entire treatment; then one should not conjecture about it further.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, you should turn the joint back and extend it to the internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left, for it naturally returns and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong agent and extend the thigh of that side more, or on its legs, or apply linseed which is pressed over the groin; another agent should stretch the hand from above so that it touches the inner sides of the legs; then strongly apply linseed over the front of the thigh, and have another person hold the end of the linseed.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is the extension from his side inside to the angle at the side of the furcula, or from the back side to the side of the flank.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in one go, so that the patient lies on the ground and arches his back.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be well; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is on the inside parts, make sure the patient lies on his side; then place the cushion over the side in that location where between the hip bone and where the buttock is placed the angle; and extend the cushion above the part of the angle to the other side of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly takes hold of the legs, and presses the area around the hip on the affected side, extending to the outer parts by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of a milder cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you excuse yourself and do not follow the training for this method of cure, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly but gently, over both ankles and both insteps.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each part be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's thigh be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then place the patient's thigh over the top of the post, and let it be in the crook of the arm; and let the length from the ground be equal to the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to lift the thigh, and place it over the patient's thigh. Another strong youth should lift the buttocks firmly, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction proper, when dislocation is at the outer part, make sure the patient's thigh lies on a cushion according to what we have advised regarding the firmness; and strengthen the bandage over the patient's thigh and its ankle.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two sticks, one on the foot and the other on the head; and place well-adjusted sticks in the middle of the leg placed over which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the stick being between their thighs, for you must ensure the extension from the parts left behind is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place diligently over that, as we said in the swelling for equalization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May it go well that the patient lies quietly on their side.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then may it go well that the leg be slightly extended, and this according to this narrative method for the leg; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the front of the injured leg, and approaches with the other hand, and at that approach, he holds the extended part at the back part to the front part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the rear parts, then do not cover the patient with a blanket leaving it open, and elevate it above the ground; having done this, place it on a hard cause, as when the width of the patient is dislocated to the rear parts, according to what we said about its position on two widths; and it should be over its face and the linens be extended, according to what we said, with no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And a compression should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you extend two legs from the patient, and when you see them equal and the leg extends its usual space, then you know that the limb has been returned according to what is needed — then you place two cushions, apply padding, and wrap it with a bandage so that the width is not distorted in any part; and adhere the patient to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then separate the thigh from the abdomen, comparing one hip to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see them equal in circumference, you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of swelling, then you return and apply a compress to that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then return that, and allow it to heal gradually over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol..xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the front parts more than to the back parts; it is not dislocated to the rear parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend his back as much as possible; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure to adhere the bottom of him with your palms, keep those between your own feet on the bottom of him with strength, and another minister extend his back so that the bottom returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of relief is that his back adheres to the thigh with ease without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that and adhere the back to the thigh, and place those simultaneously with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient in any labor for a few days until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the previous narrative was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the thumb.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The thumb is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to need, and the dislocation of the thumb is performed either on the internal parts or on the external parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the thumb is that you see the thumb swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the treatment of the reduction of the thumb is by gentle stretching, and it should be extended easily and equalized so that it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the treatment of the thumb when dislocated according to need, ensure that you make the patient lie down, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the side of the thumb in the middle of the location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the foot of the upper part, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to your right hand, and to your left by two passes, and extend your left hand; and push the foot on the right you lower the leg thereafter.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this by two passes as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot towards the leg for the third pass, and you are at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two passes according to this manner, and if you close the foot well, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for that does not return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if in you the reduction of it as we have recommended is prohibited, then make a cut on the outside of the foot, and stick a pointed rod into firm earth, and that should be between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth so that the wound does not get infected.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister should hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with cloth that lies over the heel of the foot; and then each minister extend themselves against the extension of their side, and the rod should be extended between the patient's thighs holding it there, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides you lower its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then, as the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then apply a plaster strongly with wheat grains, and tie the foot with wheat grains to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves behind the talus, for the wheat over that area should not be strong and severely affect those nerves.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two or three days; and if the wheat becomes moist, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove the wheat in the third day or in the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary for the patient to walk before that time, then be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs at the site, then when you administer in the cavity of the area as mentioned in what preceded our narrative, in another location for treatment and fomentation, before it is suppurated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that which is dislocated is gently reduced within a small extent; and what is not difficult, before it is severe.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the big toe, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground or on a table, and keep them in this position.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on the patient's side, and place your foot over what you suspect to be the joint, and gently press that area with your foot using its natural strength so that it may return to its proper position, and observe that which has been reduced and see that no swelling appears in that location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the foot of him on a table that can hold the whole foot, which has two ends, and strengthen it with structure decent and firm for three days; then release that and allow that rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of displacement that are caused by inflammation or by fracture or by any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment of it and its restoration, you must ensure that the success leads to recovery.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it; rather, one who is wise in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious, delayed, neither angry nor presumptuous, should begin with medicines that cauterize abscesses only, leaving the disease to divine judgment, but to him to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of the illness, in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then make a reduction at the beginning of the cause as soon as possible, before it becomes an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we want, administer a regimen which prevents the formation of an abscess and heals the wound as is convenient with the use of drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture or injuries in the separated bones, then you reduce the joint, and do so as we have said in simple ailments previously discussed in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And use and avoid according to your virtue that which is in the ways of fear according to what precedes my preaching; for you should give thanks to your Creator, who is more permanent for your glory, and pay more honors to your true self in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
