Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through its completion you may find its end within it, and by its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I have composed this treatise for you, which is part of my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the surgical operation of the hand is practiced in our region and in our time almost entirely privately, despite the importance of its science and the difficulty of acquiring it; and there have been only occasional brief descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have corrected many errors and hesitations but have closed off understanding of it and lengthened its study and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that I should enliven that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work to be added through the declaration and preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More so, the reason why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and drawn out, and one must be trained beforehand to understand anatomy, which Galen knew well, recognizing the youthfulness of the members and their forms, as well as their joints and separations; and he had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number and their diseases; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their effusion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this, Hippocrates is said to be silent in the short work, but more so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More so, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we said about anatomy, will surely fall into error because of it, and many people have died as a result, as I have seen too many such cases. For some are formed in this science but throw themselves into that other science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor who, by mistake, caused an apostematosis scrophulosa in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that great blood loss occurred; the woman died among her many sufferings.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there is another doctor who nearly removed a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he dried that stone with a piece of the bladder.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for it to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and arrived at a blacksmith named Negro who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and stakes of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then let it slip according to his desires, and then reattach, and then leave it alone for a few days as commanded that we release the bandage; and thus remain until the thigh and foot recover, and proceed to heal.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and tranquility and an attempt to relieve his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But still, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not contain that, and did not cease to walk the corruption through the member while the illness persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated for several days, during which the malignancy of the lesion increased in the lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain is purely due to melancholic humors, and does not affect the entire body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my son, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in its major considerations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in this entire treatise where the operation is associated with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and the praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and place your arms in that which fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you do not fail: for more remains to your glory, and less elsewhere in the world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already dissected in some monastic sources:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat evil illness, lest bad doctors be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devoted this libel according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on cups, and on plaigs, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of tortoises and similar; a chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and sharp medicinal points, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatment of the entireliber begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	First, I will describe the quality of the coals for the cautery and their effects, and in which condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its effects is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; many wise men have spoken much about it, and they are in disagreement. For me, a little from their sermons suffices, as I fear the length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that a cautery is applied to the entire complexity universally which is of flesh or sinew, except for two complexities, which are complexities of sinew.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complexity of sinew and dry flesh, they will desiccate; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for this, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not suitable in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness of sinew and dry flesh be healed by what is cautery and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say that those who say the opposite, that by cautery healing is done in all sinew and dry illness that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man to the elements of his body to the complexity of fire, you find the body is dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to his speech, for I have experienced this myself several times to confirm it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not consider that it comes to me who is already experienced in the practice of cautery through recent exercise, and who has known the diversity of human complexity and the disposition of illnesses in their manifestations, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in wet and cold diseases, for all doctors are agreed on those, and they do not differ in applying cautery to them in youth.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Know, sons, that concerning the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, on the burning cautery medicine, it is because the fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and not affecting other members only to a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medicine reaches that part in the members where it touches, and strongly causes illness in the member that is difficult to heal and rapidly exacerbates it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything other than to superfluously burn. We have known this through experience and long service studying the art on the true causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written at my leisure in this pause, and if I did not reveal to you your secret about fire, its quality in operations and the way it expels diseases, I would use a philosophical demonstration, which would be acute in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And be wise, sons, that they do not disagree about the time when it is convenient to make a cautery and pause the best season of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong sores, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those caused by malice are greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this is not done on your parts, or, sons, those who do not esteem it but the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness which is cured by cautery it is not always ready, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is not other than in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause that wind brings pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, however, excessive cautery over medicine for the expediency of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of the illness, and its virtue, and what is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities within it, and what is acquired in the body through food and semblance of those causes; but the illness where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, just as a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain does not return in it, but this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more common speech is that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a term used by those who do not understand it, for I believe it is not a cure that helps either from medicine or any other cause except the cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and the understanding that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines are not effective, and at the end of the illness, one administers the cautery, which helps then.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point from here, the last remedy of medicine is a cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and its sublime nature.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely charred; for I have already examined this and have observed that it does not do so in all bodies as in others, and a gold cautery is good and better than iron as they say; yet when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it has not been declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the reactivity of gold, and prepares to receive flame; if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and it settles in the fire on some sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely to the right position during the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the leg within the foot, so that I delay the requester what he wants from me.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and much trauma from a traumatic flow, called corissa, in the head, to the branches of the neck and to the ears leaking, and much sleepiness, and toothache, and the jaw, and universally all illness that comes from cold, such as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and semblanz in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: Primarily, you command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the virtue needed by the patient, the age of the patient, and the patient's habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command those who shave his head to do so with scissors, and place that sezer between your hands on a lowered bench and have their hands rest on their own foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the edge of your palm razor near his foot between his toes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More over, since the true location is found, mark that location with a pinch, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that cautery over the marked location with a pinch, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually constrained, while you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as the amount of error, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said about it can be seen from the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little of salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the inguinal wound and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment of tetrafarmakon until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, for it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until it has fused with a part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is attached to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing strongly on the bone until the bone cools, and this is the method of Alphécatii petit.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then cure it once it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all cases, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better to be salted when it is, because the head is heated by solution of continuity of the sun as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and perform that operation with salt.
Capitol segon.	Capitulate second.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When throughout the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain that has been prolonged in the patient, and they use cloths, beans, head poultices, plaisters, ointments, hens' combs, cotton, and linens, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve from any of these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and there is no great cold or heat, then that cautery should be replaced by another.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and expose the quantity which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place where it is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand here, and do not expose the bone, for the gout by this finds great pain different from the pain of all other cautery marks on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will say this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery on which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that on which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capitulum terminatum.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head, or a stabbing pain inside the ear, the head should be treated with medicines that purify the brain, and the other treatment, which I have described for diseases, should be administered; and if this does not help, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a hot coal, hold it there, and abrade the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid between it, make the cut there, and let the needle be concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then strengthen over the place stopped by descent compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the bandage, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place over the cut submerge in a border until the place dries up.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with ointment while it is healing.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do what some burning medicines allow, which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be done according to this manner: heat by cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called clavicle, for its head has the form of a small blade and in the middle location there is a slight prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the location of the pain, and hold it back—so that the artery which is left is not burned—and slowly rotate the small iron tool.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is burned due to the depth of the wound is significant, lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not burned, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it like a warm bandage, and keep it treated with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the end of the surgical blade according to the cautery, and be careful to avoid cutting the artery in this new migrainous condition.
Capitol quart.	Capitulum quartum.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery for ancient headache.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a headache as we have said in the previous cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure is not effective for the disease that does not suffice the above-said first cautery with medicine or the fire cautery, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place the line where you feel the pain along its length, or approximately there; then hold your hand firmly for a moment and incise the artery and pierce through to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must be careful of the continuity of the jaw, which is weakened by mastication, and ensure that the ligament is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are intact, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of blood from the artery that is severed, for in its severing there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or careful; and leaves the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will bring to memory the regulation of the flow of blood in relation to the artery according to its manner, in this place of this livre.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness in someone who cannot bear this cautery and you see the condition of the patient tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the strengthening of the artery with two knives, and this is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery for headaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with conservative causes and another treatment as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called the puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture near the beginning, and be led to the outer ear as if a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear gradually until you have found the location and tested it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery touches all points in the ear, and you stop there, then thoroughly cure the areas between until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery for the ear.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The ear condition, which is cured and treated with a cautery, is only due to substances carried by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using a cautery for the substance that causes dryness or spasms of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that type of ear condition with jerris, capipurgi, and guaragismes, and your treatment does not show results, then you must use three cauteries: the first on the root of the ear, the second a small mark on its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for relief only occurs in the part that is healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is to apply the cautery to the outer part of the ear near the tip, placing a small piece over the corner of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the hand's breadth, and then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the conifer has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of the cautery, and it is specific to the barber-surgeon, whose form is described below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtly, you should see just a little bit less than what you can perceive; and cut away just a little to avoid excess.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what is described until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with a cautery and the middle part of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cauterization is performed as described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the rear; and then proceed with what you have treated.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cauterization for oblivion by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large stones and pills of the servant purgative.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then cover the head of the patient entirely and place a poultice on the scrotum as described in the treatise on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for some beats, for that is the way of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that method and order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if by those means it is cured; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head between the lower parts of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then apply the cautery as it is proceeded.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	More so, if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition, then cauterize that over the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then apply the cautery while it is healing; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for paralysis and the healing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in modification of the head with jerras and as we have said; then raise the head of the patient, and carefully place a cautery on the middle part of the head, and a cautery on all the horns of the head, and a cautery on the back part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for them and the gout sufferers, and the disease is strong, then apply a cautery to them with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind with a cautery where it is completed by the skin of it, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that when it is healed, and this be an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitulum .x.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus modify the wound at the beginning of its edges with a hot and cold application, which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargling and mouthwash remedies, preparing them for several days beforehand with good nourishment.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And near the head of the patient, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the occiput, and over each horn of the head, he cauterizes.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply the cauteries I have mentioned, having first paralyzed and softened the body around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive oil cautery as described before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross flame, then apply the cautery to those areas where we have said in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink that which purifies his brain according to what was said in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place your hand on the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora (a type of cautery) over the circle, and then pause that one in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient rest quiet, and be kept from all disturbance.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And place the liniment; it is most fitting for an old sheep to bear this.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which it bears when more is in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place something in the middle of his head in a circle, and let it be fumigated.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient every week once, using the other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, make a small cautery mark according to its size, but keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a kind of cautery which you moisten equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cauterized area on a border or piece of gauze.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the cautery with descending water.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the beginning of the water descending in the foot has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his pulse, and keep that free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And boil that sugar in water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to raise his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of scalding water in both hands, or of one burn if it is the beginning of water in one hand.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left without a bond; and let the cautery be in that place along the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the flow of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will bring wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in their cauterization, as well as caution about flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck leaving two bones to be produced by two cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the ancient cautery of tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and through the veins and arteries, which are in the manifest place of the head above, it is verified that this is excess phlegmatic humors, then cautery that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water cautery in the feet, and make a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck placing two temples, and make two cauteries on the neck placing two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is indigestion, then cautery the area on the sole of the foot at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your treatment with what we have said in the division does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient chicory for three nights; and shave his head, and cautery the area with a medium-sized cautery and an olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery on both supraorbital regions, leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard that the artery not be burned there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the use of this pointed cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	For the cautery for softening the eyelids of the feet.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the foot is softened due to gout or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that on both supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, making them long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the supraorbital region.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery for the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and palm of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eyelid is converted to the inner parts, I must puncture the eyelid. The cautery for this can be performed in two ways: either by a hot cautery or by applying a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If using a hot cautery, command the patient to look away from where the skin is to be burned as one would when cleansing the skin, ensuring it is thoroughly and evenly applied; and if puncturing, place the point at the origin of the eyelid. Then strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that they do not tear before the skin has healed.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, once the skin is healed and even, place the head of the patient on a pillow, and then apply heat to the eyelids, marking the area with a mark shaped like a laurel leaf, which will be the starting point of the incision for the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place something hot in the abdomen or on the bladder over the belly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little in small squares, while the surface of the wound, which is like a laurel leaf, is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health from your work is that you see the eyelid of the belly already contracted and the skin around it raised from the puncture of the belly.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it for three days, and then place it again carefully on the spot between where the scar is healing.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then apply the cautery again to that area just as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it while elevating it to its natural place and ensure that the skin does not blister.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicine burning it is what you command the patient to stretch the skin while it is elongated and ensured to be even, and then make a leaf-shaped form of paper from cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and fresh fat, or what is instead thereof, and mix these fats well, and prepare this mixture to ensure it is not rubbed; then spread this over the paper which is made thus in the shape of a leaf of mint, and place that over one or both wounds; and place the remaining portion wrapped in cloth, and the patient's head be at the top.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the said portion over the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, when the patient perceives that the bite of the medicine, then leave the medicine and place it at the top as just said; therefore, when the bite ceases, then put back the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been raised, if so, you should constrict it with fire or incision, for then this is good; and if not, return to the application of the medicine at the place where it did not press and ensure that your operation remains even and contracts the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the side where the adhesion's bond is to be removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it may be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must, in your operation, keep careful vigilance that no mistake of medicine fall into it. If the eyelid becomes softened and some cause of the skin pustules on the eyelid, then repeatedly apply your medicine to that place which has become softened, and do so precisely as you did at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the way to prepare the willow leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyelids of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore according to this you should make your incision.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way to straighten it should not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal gland of the eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not bring your cure to completion, then when you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and have some minister between your laps in such a way that his head is neither hurt nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place the hot iron on the skin of the calf or over the lump of the ankle on his heel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then heat the cautery with which this is done:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is hollow, such as the shape of a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it be drawn out like a needle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient is quieted, and then place the cautery on the nostrils and destroy that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the mouth, that is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and surround it with an ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed ten days and it is not healed, then place your hand over the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and removed as you see fit in your treatise.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cautery for a fistula which some first doctors will say: place it at the location of the fistula and do that and then place your hand on that fissure like a thin form of it. Pour in there the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; hold your hand in good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter through that which the melted lead does not penetrate to that place; cover over the location of the fistula until it is covered as if in white of an egg or in water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals that through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a draft from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the fissure of the toe.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Small cuts often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then, when you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then ignite the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Let the cavity of the wound be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that hot iron in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms in the tonsil, palate, or gum, and then breaks, heals, and becomes old, forming a fistula, and your cure does not improve, then ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that ignited cautery into the tract of the fistula, and with your hand ensure it reaches the bottom of the fistula; do this one or two times. Then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so, if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and set the corrupt bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	chapter. xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of tumors.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the tumors are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines and do not confine them, then place the patient's head in a basin of water, and soon after heat the cautery in the form which will be described below. Try to pause the hot cautery over the tooth and insert it into that area vigorously, ensuring that the patient remains for a short time so that the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient spits out the salt water and keeps it in their mouth for an hour, after which they spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or rot, or if medical treatment does not bring relief, then the cautery for that area can be performed in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cow's horn cautery is done by taking a bull's horn and placing it over the tooth area. Then take this and wrap it around the end of the probe, and immerse that part in the heated bull's horn, and hold it over the painful tooth pressing quickly before it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeatedly do this several times until the heat from the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if needed, immerse a wick or cloth in the bull's horn mentioned above, and hold that over the painful tooth. Hold it over the burning probe until the heat reaches the root of the tooth cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, however, the cautery from fire you must attend to the wound of skin or of iron, and in its core there is some grossness and the acuity of the fire not penetrate to the mouth of the malaise.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that one on the tooth and put your hand in between until the cautery is well rubbed; and do this a few times so that the pain may not be aggravated on that day or the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the malaise opens its mouth well and keep it that way for an hour; and then scrape it; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cautery as much as you can locate the extremity according to what is possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery for extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the prolapses are due to phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion with medicines, and you wish to digest those slightly, then you heat the cautery to the form of which this follows: having two open ends so that smoke arises from one end through the other, and place that ignited cautery over that abscess for one minute, and another if you find it necessary before it reaches the core of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and keep it over the core infected border until what the fire has consumed is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery is as conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery treatment for hoarseness and for stricture of the urethra.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture in the windpipe of the lung predominates, especially when it is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and subsequently cauterize the vein below the heart in the compressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be sure not to apply the cautery to the vein below the heart nor burn the chain of veins but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery should be placed at the shoulder in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently, cure that with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol.xxiv.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung malady and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung malady are due to cold moisture, and the gout does not have fever or tuberculosis, and is an old malady, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the compressed areas of the leontz and buoytz; and with another cautery in the middle location of the foot between two mammary bones; and place the cautery at the shoulder according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery puncture in the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the puncture into the cells for those; then cure that with what you apply after it has healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three ramps; for this cautery, you can make three punctures according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and does not return in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then by a small movement, it will be relocated as it tries to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; then lift the collar which is in the inner part of the titillic to the outer parts above the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the cord where one head of the cautery penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two heads of the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and let it be subtle according to the quantity of the skin; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because the cauterizations are .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery for a moment, and then make the patient adhere to rest, so that the limb is not used for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize on the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is caused by cold and humid humors that extract from its composition and multiply there, if you continue the methods of cure and do not relieve it, then you will know that gout is on his back spreading its hands and its things, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: in one cauterization, place the foot with the quantity of a finger's breadth using a small cautery, and with two cautereizations place them on both sides of the cauterization, forming the figure of a triangular cautery; and leave a space between those not adjusted to prevent suppuration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be as follows. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a cauterization in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized by puncturing where someone is afraid from this cautery: and you touch the stomach with a pointed instrument according to the quantity you wish to try, then cauterize that place with the cautery; then cure it with the cure that follows until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the sore foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness before it has returned to its normal composition through superfluous egress, and the patient is treated as we have said and not comfortably, then you should ensure that the foot is raised above the level of the hips. Touch three cautery points according to this form and this quantity placed on the foot below the iliac bones, with the heel elevated like a person lying on their back.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not hold the cautery too long.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is applied equals the weight of the specific part of the leg, and it is not adjusted more; and if the wound is standing on the feet of the patient; and if not standing, then lying down, which has already extended its parts, lifting its thighs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard that you do not overapply the cautery, ensuring that only the specific part of the leg is cauterized so that the heat does not spread to the intestines, as the leg here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an inflammation or abscess is in the hip and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the hip or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the hip, the patient will feel a greater gravity and sharpness of pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the covering of the hip, then the pain will be very sharp and often causes doctors much fatigue treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, ensure that the patient is lying on their side; and then locate the site of the abscess and attempt to identify it; and then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, the shape of which was shown in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it such that the entire chain of joints is heated, until it reaches the hip, in order to achieve a healthy scab.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And ensure that you use only the cautery about which study has been made in the art of medicine, and on whose marks most doctors are familiar; but this one, after some experiments, has been found suitable for this operation, so I leave that to your discretion, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cauterying the pleura.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for pleurisy should be applied according to this manner: take from the branches of aristologia a long piece of wood that is found there, and let it have the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cautery with a cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; and leave two small cauteries guiding them, one slightly inclined towards the part where the beard starts, and two more cauteries in what is inclined between the fifth rib and the thirteenth, inclining slightly towards the rear parts; and another cauterization in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the rear parts; and one cauterization in that location which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on the sides of the foot, leaving the cauterization between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but keep it at the edge of the wound working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients have said that certain men use a cautery resembling a red hot iron, and they place it in the location between the ribs, until we bring it from there to there eliminating the pus, as we have said when treating the arm.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	More in this puncture, there is no fear, for he will soon suffer if the location of the fistula does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery for the boil.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the boil, follow what we have said about the cure in division and do not vary your cure. The cautery for the boil is performed in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the boil, following the figure of the cautery for the arm, the figure of which has been shown before.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be as we said in the manner of the cautery for the thigh equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; let the patient be held over its back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And this is another manner of cauterizing, so that you kindle the cautery having two vertements, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord which is in the direction of the limb to let the juice of the patient's left side flow out.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you lift the cord according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then place the two vertements together, ignite them, and in that space where you insert the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then withdraw the cautery; and thus he makes four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you burn, use a cautery having three veins.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cautery after it has been let to burn for too many days, as this is more conducive than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in dropsy but in the affected area properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment that we have said in the division, and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, apply four cauteries in the circuit of the heart, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be approximately equal to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it gets cool for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the bad humor from the wound while the cautery is hot so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be speedily healed with the help of health.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be spatule-shaped according to the form described above, and this is the one with which the two eyebrows are cauterized according to the form described previously.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, heat the foot by cauterizing it over the bone where the shinbone is between the ankle and the thumb, raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist that area; then raise your hand, and do not return to that place entirely, as the yellow water drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is to be used in this manner: Then place two cauteries on each thigh, and on each buttock, make the cautery touch at the extremity of the surgical instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery is to be used according to the length of the thigh: and place one end high on the thigh and the other low at the lower part of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then proceed to treat the cases which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal region.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal region is affected by cold and humidity within its thickness, it involves the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not apply a cautery unless the patient suffers from the evil of exhibiting virtue. Then, cauterize that area with a large cautery over its own stomach as previously described in the stomach cauterization, using the circular cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the subtle humors, using a fine cautery; or use a large cautery on alcatin aloes, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you find excessive moisture and the disease is tolerating it, then cauterize that on the thigh and on the intestines, and strengthen it by placing two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, which is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol. xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured as we said in the division and you do not apply the proper cure, then cauterize three cauteries over the pus below the two small triangular spines, and with a single cauterization above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the patient's stomach is inflamed and the food they eat is not digested, and their face appears swollen, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and with one cauterization on the thigh, and another on the spleen with a clavilh cauterization. Leave the cauterization open for some time, and soon cure them once they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery on the thigh near the amputation site.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate the thigh, then apply the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that amputated thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the wound bleeds.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if there are more veins, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and apply the ointments to them until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you use a large cautery on some veins, it is better for the patient's recovery.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cautery of fistulas that arise in the natural passages of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it should be treated with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and it is corrupted by foul humors, and therefore what is most worthy to come is that you try with a fine probe, and then know the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned through, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are detached from it, and remain this way for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials do not stay on the wound, then you know that they are penetrating or in the process of corrupting the flesh, or this comes from those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts hurt due to friction or because the patient's condition is weakened, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery over each wart using aawl of which the method will be recalled.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And cauterize it again with a small touch, for three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part at the location where the skin of the abdomen begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery at the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be applied according to how it is prepared.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the groin.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation and moisture in the groin, and as a result, coitus is prohibited, and the menstruation is disrupted, and induction of labor is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the umbilical region, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and apply one cautery at the lower part of the foot, or use two cauteries, and ensure the cautery is well prepared.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol of the chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors infiltrate the region of the ankle, and these are causes of displacement in its place, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the site of the dislocation is treated on the side of the foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cauterize the foot around the region of the ankle with a circular cautery, as you will have marked with a tent in the circuit of the region as it is rotated, so that the region falls at the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three cauteries of large olive size.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the intensity of the pain in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with the method we have said, and you do not apply anything else, which is an ancient practice. When you are aware that the illness is due to thick humors, treat it with foul-smelling pills or artificial ones similar to them; then cauterize the area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with a fire cauterizer.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Sir according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize the area above the width of the foot with three triangular cauterizations in this manner; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the spacing between each cauterization should be the width of one digit, and the cauterizations should be either olive-sized or larger.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, after a few passes, cauterize in the middle of the location on the head of the anqua, as these are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, let it be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize locally when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, you should slightly raise the lateral part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it is a surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle passes the pain to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there where you will pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle passes the pain to be near the knee, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Guard in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such extent that you burn nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient badly hurt or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several cases where cautery was applied to the navel and ended in the cautering, and the bed charcoal inflated between which the tumor reached the skin, and fire perforated and corrupted all the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And often follows a strong ventricle contraction, and often death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cautery each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery of water: this is the manner. Make it like a circle of iron, with its circumference the width of one palm; and make its holes according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there is another third; and the space between them is the quantity of a finger's breadth; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those gaps is one finger's breadth or two; and make on the margin of the iron appropriately fitting to the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	It is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, then placed over the part of the water, the patient lying on the mat.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be for three days; then apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of looking at it, and due to those few things we found concerning it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for those who have suffered good cautery, find the place for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But for medicines that adhere, make two circles having an arm with a perforated hole through which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the wall where they are be as wide as two or three fists.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened down and up, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the ankle where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand over the part of the water; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be like fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and tightening — for that atrocity bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the tightened wound fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is known in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a plaster containing water as is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of applying water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for the extinguished caustic from both halves, one part is three times larger, and you pause in a new bowl where the half left has a small hole drilled through it, according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause placing the bottom of the bowl in another warm bowl, and pour over the alkali and live caustic with warm water until it covers by an inch, and then hold those with your hand for good compression, and let the bowl that contains the warm water drain into the half left in the warm bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and new alkali, for then it will be of great strength, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for such operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines, which are to be cauterized wide, such as tiglium and mel anisatum and cause them to be assayed that they be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts the operation and cure of an ancient man suffering from water pain and sciatica, magnifying the good deed, and says that no other treatment was necessary, for he was cured in one day as recommended, for he immersed himself in warm and cold baths as instructed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed near a vervain herb, and if vervain is not available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be tied with a few threads and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be pressed.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient bears the compression.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in warm water; when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the ground, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that none of these medicines are used with a cautery except near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When making a cut in the sinew vein, cauterize it, and it will heal better; and the cautery should be applied in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the layers of the foot and over the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry cut of wool and inflame it in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it smoke.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and continue doing this until the heat of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the calf cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two [places] is caused by multiple reasons, such as from a wound or striking or excessive evacuation, and due to similar causes, through the infiltration of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery should not be used except in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, open, and place pillulas fitidas and similar to them, which are applied over the two areas where the pain is present three lines according to the width of the area. Then mark with cautery or more in each line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery should be applied with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, apply the cautery with three or four medio-clavilh cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol. xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	When signs of this illness appear in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulty in eating, rising, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find in the lower vertebra of the back and of the neck that it begins to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that with a cautery shaped like a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by infiltration is cured through a method of treatment rather than just alleviating the pain, but rather with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize there near the site of evacuation in the circuit of the foot joint with pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery, the form of which is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the toes or other joints, and you have to verify this, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize them and do not press your hand too close to the cautery before, just around the size of a cone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the elbow and knee, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called "myalgia," then puncture along the course of the nerves as they run, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each joint and over the back of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains remain for several days in the shoulders or the muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the shoulders.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the patient properly and do not administer medicines well, then even if good regimen and flame are used, this cauterization will not be effective, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are visible through the skin, and this begins to develop nearby, then when you order the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the wound in their abdomen may close.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And return the patient between your thighs over their abdomen, and command them to hold their belly with force until it is stitched or the skin or intestine appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return that one between your thighs, and touch the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which is similar to the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it be hot enough and sparks begin to fly.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you succeed in burning through the tendon halfway down the thigh; and repeat this on another occasion if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the pulse of the patient during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine so much that it leads to death or another great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be careful that when you use the cautery, you do not burn the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the cautery for three days, keeping it between the points where the scar from the fire heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lies on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that you support the patient's nutrition according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with great effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to lift after 10 days, properly apply a poultice, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it rest from work and the replenishment of food and drink, and use strong voices, for when it uses this regimen of healing entirely, it will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to tear again, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and what is excreted from the wound should be treated as the tender part of it. Then care for that as we have said, and it is not dressed.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some first ones have said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed there for the width in the cuts and passes above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of tortio.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in some members persists due to congestion or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long time, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its nature and intensity, and the location of the tortio and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeatedly apply the cautery to it; for customarily such pains are punctured from member to the neighboring member, so that you may achieve what you seek with the cautery before the malady is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you want to cauterize the affected area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to that which we have discussed in the division. If it is not, and you fear that the corruption might encompass his entire body and all its complexity, then cauterize the affected area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and two at the sides; leave one behind, on the neck or shoulder.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with a cautery slightly pressing into the cheek to create a small impression, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved; and cauterize on the cheek as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy is already spread over the thigh and clearly manifest, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both armpits, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the buttocks, and one on the spine, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the shins, and one on each shin, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the feet, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their foot; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the arm and of the foot, and on each heel of his feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heels that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the navel.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you apply the cautery, the more beneficial and lasting it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with their seams, for thus the patient's body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as indicated by the sizes of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And place the cautery on flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases, it is cauterized a certain stupor which affects the thighs and the feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and the inflammation of the nerves which run through that member, and the stupor is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not assume this except for one who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of blisters that are morphew.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When blisters are old and do not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over that with a cautery, using a little according to the quantity of the powder. Allow the whiteness and color of it to be relieved, and its color to change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed with flour of err (a type of grain) and lentils in rubbed oil and leaves of arnica, or with dove's blood or with duck's blood, taking a part of each, all mixed together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the groin.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery it in the circuit of it with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for adenitis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the condition of the patient, who may be old and decrepit, with little strength, or due to time, and if you want to hasten the maturation of adenitis; then cautery it in the circuit of it with multiple small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the inflamed area where the probe will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure that which is there until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where you will apply a fire cautery, then ignite the cautery with a few hot coals, and large ones as is appropriate for that location where the corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And for three days let that be, and place a hot cautery over the cauterized areas until all the blisters are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And for that cure the flesh generating wounds with ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are rotten in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And after treating it with medicine several times using sharp medicine, which is half the way instead of a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless, a cautery with fire is more beneficial for quick healing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.lix.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Moles viewed near the sole of the foot in which the disease called claw is present, and it is a large, penetrating cause that affects the foot; in these cases, cautery is performed according to two methods, one with fire and another with water-cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery with fire is to heat the concave cauterizing tool resembling a half circle, which is made of iron according to the quantity it contains for the entire sole, and has fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that ignited tool on the sole, and quickly move your hand over the cauterizing tool in a circle around the sole until the heat reaches the depth of the sole.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it remain on the sole for three days until it begins to blister.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice with chopped wild mallows salted, and let the poultice remain on that area for one night until the swelling is reduced.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If so non-convertible, and motas veguadas accideysso in the superficia del cors, majorment in las mas e les pes, then when tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, et prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, and pause aquela sobre le clau; then geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, and rete tu ma, and tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, and inpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, and atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; and espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, and aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same for the other entering which you come over all of them in their parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those pus that the roots of the claws have been eradicated by applying ointments which the flesh will regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra, and one on the feet, and one over the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the illness is healed.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol. lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body abscesses are formed and pus-filled cavities are created from corrupt materials; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauteryed with a fine cautery dipped in myrtle wood charcoal, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an herb stick of ephedra; or with a flat round cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not being creased, and when the superfluous part is broken, they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, ensure that this is done near the evacuation with a flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery treatment for flux from an injury due to arterial incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times, flux from an artery that is incised appears, causing a hole in the wound, or due to the incision of an abscess or cautery on the member, and then it seems difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand over the opening of the artery and place it firmly there. Hold it in that position until the flow of blood has stopped, then remove it without letting it come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then, over the fire, hold the olive cauteries both small and large, in several places, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large piece according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein press strongly as you have drawn back what you said, and hold the cautery so that it cuts and restricts the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the hole of the artery when you draw back what you said and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery freshly prepared from the ones that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, its extremities are burned and the bleeding is restricted, or with lixiviation with honey or with astringent herbs, or by pressing with bandages of suitable constriction; and they should be tightened with a pulvinar for proper compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More than that, he who administers proper restriction to the patient with flax and bandage or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confer any benefit but harm.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	More if such a thing happens to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open gently with your finger the indicated orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great contraction within which the wound has remained from the upper part of the lesion, and above the archery let the finger not be moved; and above the archery let it be sprinkled with cold water fomented with great coldness before the wound is closed and thickened; and more cossire in that where cauterization or medical necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and ventozas and of bloodletting and of lesions and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary among those of the forms of cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subiranetat of the cap between the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you shall proceed in this chapter in such a manner, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved of it, whenever he has requested it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, hear, sons, that in this chapter we treat of what is in the first chapter concerning cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And hear that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation occur which if mishandled can lead to serious consequences. You must ensure the proper aspersion of the vein or incision over the abscess or excision of the wound or purgation of the plague or extraction of the arrow or incision of the boil and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the greater part of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in the position where it is situated, for sometimes cases arise where your methods may be at fault due to the patient's condition.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some you will go to his illness and if it is slight you should let him die, and this because of the intensity of what he finds of his illness, and for the length of his illness, and in the illness there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give to you their advice, you expecting from that health, and his illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so you must consent to him who comes to you of whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greediness; and do not presume any cause upon that but rather certain science which verifies what you should do, and to which by succession praiseworthy success shall come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients by predicting and indicating to them to which health is converted, for in that you shall have help in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have also arranged this chapter distinguishing it into chapters according to what was previously discussed in the chapter on cautery, for the treatment from head to foot, so that you may be alleviated with what you ask about and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children at the time of birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head during nursing.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appears for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I do not see this illness in adults; and for all those children in whom I see it, death is certain, and thus I have been left with no choice but to treat them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and furthermore, the moisture increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the tendon and the bone, or is added by placing the bone on the cushion.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone, and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location on the side, and make a fissure in the lateral direction, such that the length of the fissure contains two nodes through which the humidity flows. This is the form of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two fissures in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign is that you will find the edges of the tendon open from all sides, and the water oozes out when you compress it with your hand at the internal parts; this is not what you want to hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut in the middle of the location on the side and make three fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and carefully extract all the humidity; and strongly bind the fissures with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it, and remove the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointment, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which consider when the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water appear; for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to flow blood from the patient through that flux of blood for the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hazises.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When we encounter a clot or wound in the heel or on the foot, it is customary to not consider the treatment of medicines at that time, but rather the incision of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the disease reaches its head, and nearby rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and nearby strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and nearby consider where the vein pulses; and the areas of each over the areas near the ears pressing, as they are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place your hand on the artery and feel it, and next incise each part sharply with a blade that penetrates into the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the blade letting the artery and cut it where the incisions are made above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two digits wide, for when any vein is cut, the bleeding occurs with a pulsating outflow, which jumps frequently through the flow.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the pulse, then measure the distance of three digits from the ear, and next feel it, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what must be let of the bleeding is one pint of blood, and more or less according to its strength, all of which depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, next incise it so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and pieces of cloth, and apply care to it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an ancient or acute migraine occurs due to atmospheric humidity and the quality of air in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if it does not respond to these treatments, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient lies down on their back; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your pulse, and is visible in only a few people due to its intensity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is not visible, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when you take the spatum of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you scrape the tendon where you pass through the artery; then place wax there and extract that from the upper parts where you extract it from the tendon and uncover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the extremity of the vein, and then divide a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of the vein are lengthened and contracted, and thus there will not be a flux of blood; for if not divided, it will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood from the vein once in three days.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then cut that in two locations with a double strength ligature or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and thus there will be a flux of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess which is between two threads; and do so at that time or shortly thereafter.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery between the bone and cauterize with a surgical knife when the extremities are incised, and it will be in place of that metal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do so if the patient has fever or is of a febrile constitution; for a cautery is among those causes that help to resolve humors, and therefore it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the area of the artery extraction with a cloth properly placed, and place it over finely powdered substances. And after that, with dry medicines, let flesh grow and with warm applications until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another round you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, either with a cautery, or by placing a cloth there, and strengthen your hand until the blood is constricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any reason it is not at your present, then place your hand on the area between where the wound should be cleaned, and moisten the area with water of great coldness so that the inflammation subsides, and be strengthened according to what is suitable.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cautery the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have touched the two areas with your fingers, and place some hot coals between them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, which are not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two knives is essential.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two knives is not sufficient, it is better to use three, for if they are as sharp as two knives, they can easily reach any part and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire in those areas and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in every work and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And place the space which is between two knives the amount of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitular quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for bodies suffering from sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which are on the temple of the head, and you find no cause for the cure in medical treatment, and the face of the patient already turns red and feels a walking sensation on their forehead as if it were ant走路，眼睛变得疲倦且泪水增多，尤其是在这些操作中，我们使用传统的治疗方法，并将这种治疗称为“蚁行”。
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to rub their skin on their forehead, and then cut three equal distances along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two digits: one fissure equally distant in length from the nose at the middle point of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lacreries which are in the lacrimal, and the third on another part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And look at the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and extend your hand to the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths at hand, place them over which to absorb the bleeding.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the blade of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the division through the temple into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue which is between two incisions along the line which is over the bone, and then do this for the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then scrape this cavity and insert into the first incision another time an instrument which is called cuticular, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the edge of the sharp side against the adjacent flesh, and the edge inside the bone, and push it into the migrating fissure, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than this, continue the incision to where the bone appears, and then do this in the migrating fissure between the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, express the places of the soles of the foot where the coagulated blood is retained.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a small piece of old cloth, and place over those powders mixed in oil and wine and vinegar to prevent an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of warm orbo, and then cure this with an ointment of basilicum and rose oil until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those descending from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute and continuous cold humor, and the feet of the patient are often weak and small, and their general condition shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated and in the prepuce its condition is acute pain and extreme tension, then you should know from these accidents that the humors and catarrh do not come from the venous motas of the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in such cases is this: you command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise along a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (starting from between the left and right temples; and with the incision into the bone, extend your hand through the temple muscles which are tense and should be carefully cut), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then insert between the two edges of the incision a small piece of cloth or a bandage.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen from above with powders infused in wine and oil so that it does not develop into an abscess when cauterized.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have opened it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where the new flesh begins, and apply a drying remedy which makes the flesh shrivel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from them make an ointment to be applied to such wounds arising from the flesh's nativity.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for that which attacks the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that attacks the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and vein, or it is from a plant such as cucumber or bean, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and salted wine and their likenesses, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when stone causes pain in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit into the ear, place the ear in the sunlight. If you see the stone, then distill it with olive oil or sesame oil, and administer its extract. Make the patient sneeze by inspiring, and plug the nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear upward, as these spots are often heated by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not heated, then perform extraction with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, subtlety of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is heated by the gesti, that is good; but if not, then perform the extraction with the fine, slightly duplicated subtlety.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not heated by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close the surroundings of the cannula with wax and with oil moistened so that only the cannula is opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the foreign body with strong traction, as too many spots have been caused by this.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not heated in this manner, then take a burning coal or an ember on which are placed the embers a quantity of coals, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap around that sufficiently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then introduce it into the ear canal easily, and dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so, if none of the causes we have recounted is the reason, then you should incise that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of incising it is that you begin by marking the spot where the disease in the phaena vein starts and extract the thread according to the virtue of the vein, then make a cut between your fingers and convert the ear to its upper parts, and make a small fissure in the front part of the ear and draw out its gristle into the gently pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be of a lunar shape so that it reaches the pier (lobe). If the pier is darkened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, along with the fissure, act quickly and cure it as soon as it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lies in the ear, it is one of the glands that are swollen and inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your application, then take a thin, subtle spatum according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to him the abscess of that gland which is caught in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on small wicks, and properly extract it from there or by gentle handling, or by incision as we have said, for it alleviates the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses to sneeze, and condition at the beginning, fill the entire ear with a little old wax, and place it on top of that ear where the water is. If by this it is washed out, good; but if not, then take pears, peony roots, and lion's feet according to the length of the disease, boil these in fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of them into the tube of his ear and suck on a piece of that part and strike it with another stone over the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop until all the water is thoroughly washed out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already let the water run freely, test by taking paper or wool, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the wool is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another wool and do this as many times until all the water is run freely, and squeeze that with a cannula as said of the urinary extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of fluids entering that ear, if it is a small object, pour more and one similar to it, cure that as we said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain quickly, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, and the cause of it is less severe than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	More in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that as we said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem to work, then carefully examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and spread it wide; this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and then suction it with force, and do this several times, until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if it does not obey to your assistance, then you insert and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proved effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or copper, straight, with a small hole, and a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus they push so that it is in the cavity of the cannula here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines in the cannula — which is in the ear —, and put the wick there carefully above and squeeze with your hand that part of it under compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the ears of their parents, who do not have perforated ears; this happens sometimes in adults as well, with an abscess forming in the ear meat due to a wound or from no apparent cause; sometimes this abscess forms in the preauricular region which does not come to a head, and sometimes it forms in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the region of it, which does not respond to treatment, is in the major dispositions difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see the swelling, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent abscess, open that thin membrane under which this abscess is located:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity in which the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the membrane is of two lion's teeth widths so as not to irritate the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make those thin incisions and cut through them so that all the flesh is thoroughly drained.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the region of the ear, then take a thin lion's tooth and heat that iron slightly in fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you sense an overflow of matter that the patient has with ease due to the heaviness of defecation, relieve the pressure on it with ease; and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth in the ear according to the amount of swelling you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the swelling; or that you drain it with water and powder it over, and use it. And if you see the ear already pushed out, then dig out what you have drained and replace it with another that you wrap in cerrot made with olive oil, until the abscess is discharged; and cure it as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if a flow of blood occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, rub it well, and place it over the ear, and use the other cure which tightens the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of toothache which happens in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Toothache which happens in the eyelids; some times it is moist, at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then make sure you have those flannel or woolen cloths, and moisten them with the foam from their saliva, and place them over the areas after thoroughly wetting them.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of venous blood, then use a pointed cautery to cauterize those areas subtlety.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near the incisions, and the sores heal when there remains any cause of their saliva; and when they are cauterized with fire, those salivas are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care of the great swelling that occurs in the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings occur in the eyelids of the eye at some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is augmented to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a fissure there for its width, and then scrape that from all parts with facilitation so that it evacuates, and suspend that and absind it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have access to its beginning so that you penetrate the eyelid with a slight incision, then you do this without any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is declining to the parts inside the eyelid, you scrape the inside surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a needle, or one that you choose as an incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then this is noted for no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash well with salt water; and dress the area with a solution that should be healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is caused by grays that are generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates their ills and affects their catarrh, leading to death; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun due to this, and tears congregate around those areas.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this, you often see them cry on their cheeks all the time, and on their cheeks they sleep; only around their eyes, their forehead is wet, which has been covered by inflammation, and the imminent appearance of excision is evident in those areas; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you feel the excision between those areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of operation is in the patient who places his head under your hand, and then covers him with a cloth, and makes a cut according to the quantity that contains arthrench from all parts, and then places it over that and presses with your thumbs so that excision is added in the middle of the circle, and then makes a hole in the middle of that wet area by applying steam through a crack, and the crack should not be larger than the crack made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding part where you cut the cord completely until you reach the artery, for in the later stages the artery passes through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract those sheets which you have wrapped around your thumbs and fingers, and move them back and forth with your right and left hand until they are thoroughly dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not press at the fissure so that the fluid does not escape and leave it alone.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if it does not appear at your artery near the beginning of the fissure, then press a little cotton into the artery before proceeding; then extract the same as we have said; and place sheets of linen in water and vinegar and apply them over the area to strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus rinse with salt and apply it to the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in that location, then cure it by applying cold plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye so much tension causes the natural skin to stretch and become tightened, then those loosened eyelids become signs of illness such as constant tears and softening of the eyelid and tissue. This is often a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir of the eye, and it can be treated in four ways: either with a cautery of fire; or with acute medicine as previously mentioned in the Capitol on cauterization; or by surgical incision and suturing; or with cannulas as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus cover the head of the eye with your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the one where the thread from the part of the eyelid has come loose, and drive the needle with thread above, and place this—near the edge of the eyelid where the skin arises—and pull the thread up above the eyelid, then turn it.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then place the skins tightly against the surface of the inner eyelid, between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland; and extract the fat, then place fine particles of cotton or cloth over the eyelid, and cover it with a flap, as illustrated by a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But more importantly, ensure that the figure corresponds to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, and those in whom a significant amount of fat needs to be removed according to how much the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make the incision on the two lines you have marked, starting between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and scrape out the entire area. Then suture the two edges with a needle or thin wool thread, clean the wound, and apply any excess thread on two sutures for certain causes that require it, if you want to do this, otherwise, you need not proceed.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, let the stitches of the wounds remain for three or four days, and then heal this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and cure it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should seal the wound and add to it; but stitches are better. Therefore, so said the ancients of taxonomy.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if the limb is in constant use by the patient, and it is from good surgery, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of taxonomy is to sew over the eyelid in a figure resembling a leaf of laurel, and then lift the eyelid by three stitches arranged and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible this way, take the stitches, and this is not feasible, then take one needle on which you have thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties, making the threads equal in tension, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire area on which it was sewn as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if you make an incision or a fissure, suture that abscess with thread and to its likeness, and apply ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes under the eyelid, its own skin should be converted. Then use the incision method that we have said before; but suture in as few places as possible.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize with candles is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two candles or two thin sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of which is a quarter of the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add any subtlety under what you have excised from the eyelid of the well, and constrict the canals of all parts with great stricture, and leave that for a few days, for the cord through the stricture will die and be denied, and it will be possible for it to fall by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and proceed to cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then since it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has neither more nor less in terms of length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of stinging skin in the eyelid with an awl when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging eyelids, the operation on them is that you take a fine awl and place it in that fine fiber of each eyelid, and then adjust the ends of it with small nuts in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be equal to the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then make another fine thread and place it briefly, using the ends of the previous one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the ill area's edge in the middle of the wound, and expose it to the sun so that your work is seen, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the groove of the tightly set skin, adjusting it as needed, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while extracting the one above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upwards and insert the other one into the axilla, using one or two or three pieces of skin, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand towards that so that the skin is well set in the axilla under the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the axilla is pulled with the thread and the skin is not set, pull the thread to the parts where you have placed the thread, so that in doing so the axilla will be set.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when you bind it with a view to healing, then you will apply the flax and spread it over each part of the wound, and leave the dressing for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it at that place, or leave it until it grows to fill some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of hematite that appears in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is hematite in the wound, and it causes a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the upper or lower side, due to poor healing of a wound or a section or a cautery, it is called leporina. This hematite can be natural or accidental, and is caused by the healing of a wound or sections or cauteries, or by something similar to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it at what is between those a strip of linen cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up, constrain; for if you do this it will return to worsen more than no time having been there.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that soften thus as fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it is steeped and seed of it, or ointment of yarrow, which be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the strip in that, and apply with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with everything that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a simple correction of hernias that do not return to the form that it had before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the cure of hemicrania which is caused in the eyelid, proceed.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hemicrania which is caused in the eyelid, which is named specifically hemicrania; and it can be either of a natural cause or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidentally, it is caused by a blow, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for this operation is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that needle in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh at the upper parts near the needle and sew it with the needle, making a wide incision.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if you return the figure of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the edge and place it in the grooved figure, and with that, turn the eyelid, making two fissures in the margin of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two cracks at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and a corner is made between them when they come together, form their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp point left from it, what remains of the incision.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with thread; and apply those oiled with medicines and liniments until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make a straight incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the forceps between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech on incising when above or left over, let it flow in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of varied spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans at all times prepare tools in any manner which is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form, or near that, and that malady according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in adult men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid from above with the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the tip of a needle, place the eyelid, and elevate or extend it over the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a very fine lancet, which should not be too acute for the incisions, having a slightly obtuse tip so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the humor without diminishing the eye's acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And may your incision allow that adhesion to be easily removed so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the wound enough salt water to which you wash; or distill it from zinc dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in cow's milk, and for the first day use conservative treatments until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the lacrimal gland.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, resembling a thin hard film; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be taken off, it can be cut and the membrane should not be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prohibits both light and movement of water.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of acting in the extraction is that the patient keeps his head in your lap, and then opens his eyes, and raises his eyelid with your hand, and then collects the thumb with one finger and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or a bull or a cow, or similar, or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and put that in the middle of the thumb, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the thumb with glue; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape off the skin the moisture from the thumb which closes the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with the hair into the root of his eye.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you extract the stone in the socket of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct, so that by this extraction it does not suffer continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the thumb is placed on the sole of the extended foot or on vinegar, as we have said, and then it is extracted with a lancet from which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the lancet you do not touch the corneal membrane and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a little salt of cumin or of dry mustard to the wound, and leave it there for another day; and then care for it so that what comes into it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the thumb is not nerveous and you cannot put the needle in it, then use this type of thumb treated with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the space of the patient and take a sharp lancet of hot steel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	of fine subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it has congealed and is stuck in the ulcer, then spit in the wound made of vinegar or urine or salt water, and pour the liquid into another vessel.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation over it until all of it is removed, but if a boil remains in the wound, then leave that and cure the boil until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation over it until it is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The lacrimal bone, if noted in the wound by great damage, should be suspended with a pin; and incise that part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then spit vinegar or urine into the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of algazardenic and what is born from flesh attached in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the folds of some eyes, red flesh arises and is pressed over when covering the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids and lightly clasps the eyelids from the outer parts and is gathered close to the railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in such cases is that the surgeon places his hand on the patient's head; then opens the folds of that area and collects all that flesh with forceps or tweezers; afterwards incises the flesh at the beginning until everything is completed with the scalpel, and guard the fold so as not to undo what you have done.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made where you incise those, either on the cheek as we have recounted in the incision of the eye, or with small forceps with which you collect the swelling according to the form it will take in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, once your incision is completed and all that flesh is retracted, fill the fold with salted salve, or sprinkle in it powdered red substance resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place your hand over the fold from the outside as in a paste of honey until an abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of swelling is observed and infected by a scab, and there is fear of an abscess, then let the whole and cure that abscess with what causes it to yield, and then repeat the operation over that area until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encountered in the healing of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Moreover, you must know that all healing of swelling from cold should be through natural means or by chance. Use iron for this, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the part is suffering from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol. xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collecting knowledge on swelling.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge is gained from veins that are prominent on the swelling and you prohibit their operation, which alleviate the swelling over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the swelling in which knowledge is gained is strong and if there is no other illness (causing it), then you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your discretion; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with strong but subtle forces, in subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while encouraging those veins to rise and be rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And see to it that you do not let the heat reach the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, then remain firm in your operation so as not to enter except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the heat verdant vinegar or rue so that by its acidity it may corrode what is raised from the scab.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you in that hour, then plaster everything with what yields relief to the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is alleviated and an abscess secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to how the patient behaves as it is being healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the way of the gout:
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of its history precedes and it is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead incise over the abscess and let it mature. Extract all the moisture which is within it, and leave the bone uncovered until it is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is discovered and corruption or blackness appears in it, then rush to it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called "asper cap," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, holding which it is made punctuated by the abrasion of a file or smoothed with a fine point (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place him over the rotten part of the bone, then turn it gradually between your fingers, and press your hand little by little so that you know that this corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, then restore the place affected by desiccative and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the corrupt flesh is cut from the body and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and does not suppurate and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and do it in this manner: uncover either the bone with forceps or with sharp medical instruments, once the bone is uncovered, then take three strips according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be narrowed at the tip in the same way you see it.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place it over the bone, which should be near the lacrimal bone; then stretch your hand a little longer, and turn your hand with the strips so that they penetrate the entire bone, and that feels the pain where it finds air flowing because of the illness.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they are accustomed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the material which was diffusing to the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes entirely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the patient, followed by applying ventosa several times on the neck for scarification and sucking with good extraction; subsequently place liniment on the hernia made from acatra, aloe, garlic, and dragon's blood; finally, strongly apply the plaster over the hernia using motz of powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take lint from a lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then use those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those over each other according to the quantity of what they have need of.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth bound tightly; and repeat the cups with suction six times; and after placing the cups, leave them fully straight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then make it fully straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the ligament fully straight day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the pain has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the binding and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and then it swells and protrudes, you should remove the eyelid as much as a degree of hair. This forms a shape like that of a man. If you wish to incise this, the operation on it is as we have recommended. You should insert the needle into the slit of the uveal membrane from the lower part into the upper part, and then place another needle with a double thread in the part near the lacrimal gland, making the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position. Then incise the location of the double thread and lift the part of the uveal membrane in the circuit of the needle, strengthening it accordingly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place yourself over the wool infused with white goose fat, leaving the thread in the wound until it dries.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the wound with what will comfort that which is within as the plague heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, gather all the parts into a circular cloth at the center of the wound, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes from within the wound, allowing the humeur albuminée to flow out and quickly drain the wound.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcera is nothing but a disease that settles in the wound, resembling water descending, and it is not the other.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to position the patient on the prepared and straight bench, then hold the head with your hands in two parts and pull that which you see the disease approaching the parts left, ensuring it dries up and does not descend, and keep the light so as to observe the causes as clearly as possible.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent is not prepared for the healing, then do the operation on the patient and then take a subtle spatium and put it over the gossypium, carefully letting a little continue along the conjunctiva to the cornea in the crown (into the place of vision), ensuring that the healing is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And since it is forgotten outside, then you drip water infused with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the cure of water descending in the urethra.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is appropriate to puncture as we declared, according to the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And then you must do the operation with the surgeon between your thighs on a cushion, keeping his hole there small.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand close to the corner of their eye where the water is the left; or with your right hand if the water is the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the basin, if the water is on the left; or with your left hand, if the water is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the basin near the corner for the pregnancy of the ray in the white of the eye from the side of the lower eyelid, and then pour the basin with virtue and turn your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the basin is already permeated due to virtue.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And make sure that the measure of the path of the basin is correct when pouring the measure of space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, for this is the corner of the eye; for you will see the pupil through this with the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand in the spot where the water is, and then draw it down one time or another, and therefore when the water descends quickly, then see the patient there where his vision falls upon it quickly, and your hand remain there.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you draw it down another time in front that your hand be not wet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and move your hand gradually back and forth, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in the water and use that to wash the area inside; then place a cloth, or stop, or infused wool in olive oil and egg white over it, and tie this with a bandage around it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	More often now and those of our times prefer to place over it a cloth soaked in olive oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your hand does not fit into the area due to its hardness — which is common in some individuals where the area is very firm — then draw out the pus which is called alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore perforate there that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a way to a delicate spot below.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the probe as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should allow the patient to rest comfortably in a bed made for him in a dark room, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the wound to allow its natural healing, and do not direct its flow towards the right or left side entirely.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the ointment according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then take the patient out of that dark room and expose him to fresh air, and make some incisions, and return the ointment on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this during the hour of cure or shortly after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having a cavity that you open through which water can pass rather freely by great and vigorous regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if it happens that an abscess forms, having a cavity that you incise on the seventh day, and correct that with which the abscess yields.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you make the incision and place your hand on the face of the wound, for which the bleeding may be regulated, leave it for a few days, allowing it to heal in the darkest part.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually let it heal and turn into its natural colors.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excuses a disciple from vision for some days, and then you should attend closely to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have learned from some of those who treat Artach that some say to make a fire in Ayrac and heat it, placing the liquid water on it.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But, however, I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is a new method.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of madness that may occur in those who ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of lead or iron properly, and their extremities are at this subtlety triangular, the尖锐端如同那个一样是形状。
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	For the healing of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are hidden various pieces of flesh that are joined by some cause which is associated with a scorpion of heavy weight or with a polyp of that kind; this illness is called polypus and it is similar to that kind of polyp represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is flesh cancerous, dark in color; and of it is that flesh lion-like not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh neither fraudulent nor cancerous, make the patient lie between your hands and expose it to the sun, and breathe on its nostrils, and prick the thigh in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the abdominal parts externally, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you know all the flesh has been cut away; if any remains due to some cause where the excision is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate cutting for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if the lordship develops into an abscess or a suppurating boil, then pause at it with what is needed; or of malignant boils, then open and cauterize it where the incision should be made to drain the pus and leave all the cavities open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then place a hot compress on the nose and apply either a salve or ointment.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is opened and fluid continues to discharge into the mouth, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the fluid does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is no pus, and only bone fragments of the nose which have not been reached by the incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	When you find that an intestinal mass is present in the patient, use needles on it and place between each needle the size of your finger or less, then extract the mass and insert one end of the thread into the naris with a ray or for another reason which is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since it has done this, let its odor enter before it reaches the nasal passages, and sit on its chair; for too many spectators watching this action in the schools is a light cause for those who wish to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then return the two ends of the thread, one end that hangs over the nose and the other that passes into the nose, and then apply a ligature of flesh around the needles that are in the thread, and do this before you can tell that the flesh is against the needles of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the thread, and place a catgut in the nose near the exit of the blood, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you desire a cure that is dry, use of that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal purges, at which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or of copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling a spout.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the mouth of the instrument for making nasal purges should be flat and open; to which you can manipulate at the rear end, with which you will have it when you heat in it oil or what you want from the viscous and suctible causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal purges are precious: recipe of castor oil, of white balata, of galingale, of saffron powder, of long pepper, of escufacia, and one drachm of spicy peel. Mix them with the juice of wheat and root, and make pillules, then dissolve one pill in clear water, and administer it into the nose of the patient facing forward.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the roots to the tips of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Pustules appear at the roots of the nose, and are enlarged and mounded over several days as the pimple becomes visible upon examination.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should examine it when the pustule first appears, and keep track of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place a covering over the area, or use a cautery or burning medicine where it was located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the examination is delayed until after the pustule has enlarged, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and of little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with a sharp object as it may be an abscess; for pustules that you examine at this stage should beware of the great harm they can cause to the person upon whom they have formed.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and examination is possible throughout the area, then drain the infection and examine it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar diseases.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not much concern yourself with that operation but rather with some skilled individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find any cause of these conditions, consider whether it is fresh plague with its own symptoms, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and proceed to cure that which remains until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then you should scrape each part of its visible edge until it bleeds with pus.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and thistle over them, and place a piece of transparent plaster or some other consolidative plaster on top of the powder, and leave this mixture for two to three days. Then remove that and change the plaster, leaving it until the roots have resolved themselves, and proceed to apply ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that wind enters in the two lips in the parts within.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Slight rashes often appear in the inner parts of the lips and become hard swellings resembling lumps of fat; some are small, while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully remove all parts of the lips and each of those hard swellings, and during the excision fill the area with three threads to tighten the wound, and afterward wash it with wine and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the flesh adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken over the gums that are tightly attached, which the ancients called albulus, then withdraw that probe or whatever instrument you have used, cleanse that place thoroughly, and let the healthy fluid flow or let it coagulate.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something warm on the area, or other styptic or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it; for afterwards the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth being firm.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in both internal and external parts, and between the gums, there are sharp, hard edges, some times they are blackish and are caused by yellow or green substances that corrupt the gums, causing the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, make sure you cut the patient's thigh between your thighs and place the patient's head in a pillow, and rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear with some substance that does not cause any harm, and this is done for the blackness and the yellowish coloration and other changes they may have undergone.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if what is in those at the beginning of the reasoning is good; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning on those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have required grooves carved in various forms and with diverse figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, some razors for which the tooth is shaved from the inside out are different from the razors for which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you must prepare, which you will often see:
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cure the tooth with all skill and take your time in its extraction, for no cause can compensate for the removal itself when it occurs, as a substance is sublimated during the process of extracting it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	More carefully cure when the gout forces you to extract that tooth, for firmly you must be certain which is the painful tooth, for many removals of pain deceive the gout and mistakenly target a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this in the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore you must be certified which is the painful tooth, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with spatum in which some virtue may be dissolved from the root of the tooth of all parts, and then near those ties said, or with fine scissors at the beginning gradually until those concussions.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply water to it strongly holding great force for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between those ties well that you do not suffocate, and then extract the tooth according to right manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the area with ease and force the removal of it as is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap that part with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a fine thread so that it does not get broken during your manipulation of it and hold it firmly.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And ensure that you operate precisely during the scarification of the circuit of all parts of the gum and keep your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the patient for the malice that is more than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their operations and boldness regarding the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised; which vain thoughts bring great illnesses upon men, which are harder to treat than boils, and the reasons behind their failures all, or some of those, or that they extract from certain bones of the jaw as we have testified with many examples.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of the boil, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are fluxes of pus for this, as often happens, then take some ginger and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not work, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long, short, and thick, so as not to bend when you need to use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be as when you close large openings so that when stretched they remain brief and tightly bound.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, straight and tightly bound, and in the ends of those, there are teeth which enter each other and stretch by descending force strongly, and some times the ends of those are in the shape of a duckbill which is called a ciconia, so they are strong in construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Broken Jaw Bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken due to some cause, first ensure that you apply pressure firmly over the area for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the ends of which are shaped like the bill of a duck called a ciconia or guant, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of these should be made inside like a hammer or awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not obey you, then carve over the crack and strip all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is named atali, so it is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And briefly, the extremity is broad at the top and small at the bottom, and it should not be twisted so that it does not get stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the crack is already opened, that is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments, the forms of which are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular, broad at the extremity, in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular and narrow at the extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument, which has two ramps, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for the rasuration of teeth; for this youth is made with this instrument, which resembles a large spoon, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity twisted or curved, which is some swelling, and not completely enclosed so that it is not contracted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisans find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; for there are ailments to which the ancients would neither apply nor pause with a proper instrument, due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if possible, then place a weight over it in its location. What is convenient from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth should be applied, and the gesture for this is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And place some swelling little by little, and tightly hold or press it with your hand so that it does not escape or move while the bone is completely drilled; then return the area to its proper place using suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a small ulcer, first remove that part of the ulcer and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in elderly women; therefore consider: if a tooth is nearly touching another tooth and cannot be separated or aligned with it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then use this instrument, the shape of which is shown here; and it resembles a pig's snout, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision with the instrument you will use to extract that tooth over several days due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominent and worn down, then file that part with an Indian steel file of which the shape is shown here:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of iron and the margin sharpened; and made of small pointed pins like those of a file, on which the tooth is filed little by little over several days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line the one at the end, and sharpen the other with a few razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that part so that the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and equalized, and be filled to prevent the tongue from being cut and the word from being corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth are injured by concussion or removal through impact or extraction, and the patient cannot strengthen the area that is missing, and you have treated this with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong use gold foil and not silver, because silver becomes loose and may come out in a few days, while gold does not change over any amount of time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the honey be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recao is that you take the honey and put twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will appear two tortuosity of the honey between two molar teeth, or one or spots, before the mesh reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then pass the thread into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill before it is mangled.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tension be such that when you pull the thread, it tightens the honey at the roots of the teeth so that none escapes.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the excess threads of the honey with forceps or tweezers, and add them to any place with care, and mix those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the mangled one, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it stay thus tied like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those parts in such manner throughout its entire duration.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two wisdom teeth, as you see these ligaments:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, then they should remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by any mere artisan or fool.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they are made in the form of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth failed, and strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol.xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which causes the tongue to be affected for some days is either natural, one that one is born with, or accidental and occurs due to a wound which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, their existing head in your hand; elevate their tongue, and then incise that nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be separated from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if there is any hardness or nodularity, and this is due to the consolidation of a boil, then you grip one end and incise it according to the width at which you have incised the nerve and where the nodularity has dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer and that you incise here to allow the flow of pus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision tracts with warm water or with vinegar or with wine; and then place the tongue to drain. If it is necessary, let the patient keep the tongue out overnight so that it does not become swollen again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	And if there is a flow of pus, place a glass triplex over the area to drain it; and if the pus continues to flow, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that suits this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then the other causes are treated once it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, I leave the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	In some cases, when an abscess in the tongue occurs, I leave it untreated, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly it is enlarged until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is to open the mouth of the patient sixty degrees facing the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dusky color or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that area.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turning white, in which there is moisture, then you apply the probe to it, and incise that with a sharp knife, and incise all of it. And if the wound begins to bleed during your operation, then you stop above tigli trissat, which is vitriol, until the bleeding is reduced.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol. xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	For the extraction of abscesses in both ears and those that arise from the gola (throat) and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When pain arises in the gola (throat), they are glands which are clustered like ears, which occur externally and are named as two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, and has little sensation; then do not touch it with a iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; first let it mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, tender, and the root is fine, then it is to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And in the operation, you must consider before your operation whether the abscess has already rested and is completely cured or if it has decreased somewhat; then operate on the patient before the sun, with his head on your lap, and lifting his mouth, and a servant holding his tongue between their fingers, taking the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press at that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and cut over it quickly, then take a probe and place it in the abscess, and pull it outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the ends are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which should be made of iron and well tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that space from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and near the incision the sore should heal with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, heal with water from the decoction of crushed colocynth or of hollyhock leaves and similar to those causes that constrict the flow of blood, and cure that once it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes sores appear in the groin or other abscesses elsewhere on the two ears, and incise those according to what is said and done in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess tended to have a brown color, with little sensation, and which had already closed her groin. The woman breathed freely, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she was close to death if more water were to remain for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already been pressing so long that there were two handbreadths between where it would exit through two cuts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I would incise the fistula completely and fix it in one of its ends, then pull that end, stretching the large portion. Next, I would incise the other part, and firmly hold the mouth of the other cut, grasping its tongue, and finally fix the end in the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I would cut a large part of it, but blood was flowing from it only in small amounts.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the swelling was gone from that woman, and she began to drink water soon, and also eat food. Then I did not cease incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would recur in its place, which continued to form as long as the previous one lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I enlarged and cauterized the swelling, then applied the plaster; next, I walked around and did not know what God had done to that nearby me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXV.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of the heel when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When a catarr (catarrah) affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure agreeable, and thus you often observe that the abscess caut has already passed away and become subtle, then probe that you incise that which is aggregated round; if it is at that length, and it bleeds, of dusky color or black, and is not a centimeter, then you should fear the incision of it, for there is fear concerning the illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe that according to the manner I have said of its whiteness and length, you should lance the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument of which you determine its form and then fix the needle in the new site, and draw that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are called in the incision of two abscesses.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And ensure that you do not insert it further than what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you insert it more, you will alter its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And near the insertion, use what we have described in the insertion of two fingers, and ensure that it is cured within.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient was frightened by the insertion, ensure that you use anesthetic in the cautery to alleviate his fear, and the way of applying the cautery is simply with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient in your lap, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as described. Additionally, take the sharp water from the section on cautery application, and apply it to the area without being too thin or subtle. Fill the cavity of the instrument according to its shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the external part of the cavity in which the medicine is applied be as wide as the handle of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine over the vagina, while the patient opens his legs to allow saliva or mucus from his mouth to enter through the internal medicine, so that it does not decrease for any reason on the ligaments and affect him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take some cloth and wrap it around the tip of the reed, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube from above so that the cloth adheres to the tube. Do this as many times as needed to achieve the cauterization of the uvula you desire, and then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and then cauterize the area around the uvula with a wrapped cloth. Modify what is in the circuit of the uvula by the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally by soaking and internally with remedies until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safe and long-lasting without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some cases of tonsillitis are cured by what is finer than a cautery or incision, which is treated with subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikadis arabicus, camomile, powder and resemble those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in one ointment, and be submerged in vinegar and boil; let the ointment be well beaten with decent honey, and let it be in the middle of the ointment a wick, over which is placed an instrument hollow of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the tonsil above the uvula, so that the uvula becomes somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then it repeatedly passes over those spots several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would too tightly bind the abscess. You should not do this, but declare the abscess with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place on its end a clog of wood, so that the opening of the patient's anus is blocked, for the wooden clog prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible from the wound or thorn, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that you may know what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or flax cloth or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge dried with wine and tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are located and will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and wrap it in honey, then place it inside and gently extract it; or take a pepper and gently insert it and then remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let his head be raised up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches him, so that it affects him and either what covers the bone or the spine, or what that doctor places with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, let the patient himself insert honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and cover it below, and pull his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it becomes ineffective.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty fluid associated with the gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gouty fluid is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the heat of the gout during the gout attack in the sun, for you may have misunderstood the language of the instrument we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either through a small needle or with fine threads properly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout attack of the gout. Then place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty fluid is dead and stays out of the gout attack), and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a towel full of water, work its mouth into the area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any part of it, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour using your hand, as soon as the gouty fluid senses the water it will begin to drain.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not already fomented with what we have recommended, then foment the thigh with cimeter or asafetida using the instrument we have recommended in the fomentation of uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may heal.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of fomentation is that you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfomentation; and place the thigh on the end of the cannula, and close its end so that the subfomentation does not get extinguished until you see that the subfomentation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not heal, then you repeat the subfomentation several times, and abstain the thigh from drinking, eating salty foods and others, and do not drink water. It is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it resembles tongs as you see them, but with some curvature in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	and the end of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is wide, and on which it is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the essence of the speech concerning abscesses and their sections is found.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special kinds of boils, according to various methods as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are varied in puncturing and sectioning them through two methods. Of these, one is according to the kind of abscesses themselves; and by this, they grasp the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the places where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshly place is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its own judgment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And of abscesses, some which cover that they should not be punctured but rather wait for the maturation of the healing in those or their complement.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And of other abscesses which cover that they should be incised when crossed, and are not maturing according to their complement, thus like abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when near a joint, the essence of it is prolonged into what is within that circuit, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near the main member, and if you delay the incision of it until its natural maturation for the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore incise that which is not matured; and it should not be incised raw, due to incomplete digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that no preon from it can extend into the inner parts of the anus, and a fistula may be formed, or what is done in its term until it is healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you should know the time for the incision of the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is ripe when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and the diminution of inflammation and pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know when to make the穿刺在脓肿下方的位置，并且是脓液从切口排出的时候。
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts near the groin or feet, and at the location of the groins, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, otherwise, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to wait until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to its natural course, as we have said; for if you puncture it before this, you will prolong the course of the pus and mucus, and increase the thickness and depth of the abscess.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And see that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, see that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done as with bread and done in such a way that it stays, just as one does for crops of melons and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which an incision is made as the shape of a holly leaf, just as with abscesses of gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, see those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More for those in which none is done as such, where the abscesses are superficial, see that you puncture them with a superficial puncture, or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, you should pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the foul matter at that time; having extracted one part, then pack the abscess on another day, and extract a larger part, and repeatedly do this until it is thoroughly drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of verdure virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit has resolved into the exit of the healthy fluid, and greatly alleviates the illness, so you should openly proceed.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you make your puncture in which you perforate these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either herbs or cumin seeds; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the puncture are deep, then you should pause to allow them to heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been cut or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you should close it with old wool or with a thread made of linen, just as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure the area as what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you happen to have a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer hot water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for many minutes.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in many places of this our libel and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with wine and oil using a cautery, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fatty, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be applied within the first three days, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing within the time that it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already spoken of, all abscesses are treated in a particular manner by chapters singly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and they contain nodules which are formed; and the nature of these nodules is spotted.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are lumps, and among them are those that contain a humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain a humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and among them are those that are hardened, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, just as you should not fear the extraction of these without causing any resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for the section of these is that you puncture them with an instrument in the form which is close at hand, which is called a lancet until you know it contains fluid.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what is contained is humidity, then section that with an instrument along its length for a superficial section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of line B between line G. Then as the humidity is evacuated, you scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave none of that cause of all, because too many times returns if left of that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, because with it you will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply it to that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; after that, cure the wound with ointment while it is healing.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having the form of a cross, and make an incision between two sides of the section, and sweep all of it away, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, make the incision and for treatment as we have said before; the incision over an abscessed lump is lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes such abscesses in the head have no humidity; the cause of which is that I cannot incise an abscess on a woman's head, so I probe and extract the abscess like a hard, rough, white pear that could not be cut, and if any were subjected to percussion, it would burst.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter; as with abscesses that occur in children's heads, you should drain the ears, but the incision for all of these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the incision for those below the knee in such a way that it relieves the body of the disease to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to those things that concern the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Black spots often cause abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane. Just as with nodules and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are spots. Some are rough, and some contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Touchement, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not a swelling, cut that one with superficial dry incisions from the upper part to the lower part along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, and extend the edges of the skin flap outward with needles, or with several small needles if you need those, as we have said in the case of abscesses in the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the incision not be too deep, so that it does not touch the vein or nerve with your hand during the operation, or to relieve the patient, and do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop yourself from operating, then apply a glass of salt or other powders which are fluxes of safron, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which is paused the acuity of the abscess and makes the wound mollified and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So return to your operation once it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulas, so cut and cure those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the vein of the scrofula, avoid cutting that scrofula near the vein.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you place a strong fold of cloth there, let that lie in such a way that it may fall by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old wool which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrophula completely, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and press until there is no further discharge.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrophula, then you must understand to incise its base, remove it, and administer suturing as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrophulas containing humidity, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and pause the puncture below where the dry pus of the body accumulates, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture, applying ointment and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of generative flesh for its healing.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the ulcer from the abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section in the inguinal region, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with oblique veins, a cavity should be avoided during the excision of the inguinal region, for if this is not done properly, all the veins and major vessels of the groin may be injured.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses on the mouth or groin or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the inguinal region to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, incise the epilhotium and leave three or four small circles of the epilhotial rings, each in the space between two rings by quantity, so that the section is in chondral, not cartilaginous tissue, and this place is suitable for a section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are low.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, he should do so when he extends the thread of the needle away from him, and then cut the thread just before it reaches the channel, but more importantly, avoid the vessels of blood if he sees any.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cicatrix as we have recounted; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that ignited by what is of its disjunction and by the interruption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is missing.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Abu casis says that the essence of what we have recounted, the exposition, is merely that you see which of those abscesses have already drained pus, and the patient has come out of danger, with his life preserved. Some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through a small opening in the area of the wound, thereby saving him from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I order to keep the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, when it is time, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the patient's wound and incised part of the root of the lung. I was called to treat this case, and collected the blood as it flowed from the small wound. Then I uncovered the wound and gathered the blood which was flowing from it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I must confess that there was no incision of vein or artery, and the wind has passed from the wound, and cured her where it was injured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any injury, not even in her voice, and soon returned to her normal state.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the case of the paronychia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an abscess that occurs on the forearm, and is called a wrist hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, known as a wrist hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not let him think you are a blacksmith only in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And touch that and investigate what is said about it, and if you find a semblance of fatty nodes, and they are not suspended in any of the veins, then you cut there as with the nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursicle; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place the area to be cured under what is suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on types of fatty nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the various types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the types of nodes in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And note that I recount thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Then I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and violent pains until the boiling of the excess is alleviated; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	More often than not there is no heat or fever or pain, and concerning that lion's head which is at the back of the neck.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a rash and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether oily or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express it and inquire about it at its beginning in the tissue which is called interstice, according to the form it will take in the capitol which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the threads thereof gradually with that until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand near the measure of the size of the abscess, and then remove the interstice and consider what is situated in the recess thereof.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if dry above it in the incision has the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, suspend that in the incision, and strip the vein from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract the healthy part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should tie it with several ligatures, and then you extract it in pieces so that it does not rupture for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it ruptures for any reason, either little or much, the node returns according to the most likely outcome.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it ruptures any small part, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, place a cautery over the area that is an abscess, and cure the other with the other method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and cure that which is within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with one third that is vitriol and let it dry for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; then return to incising what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, or of alum, or of fallen leaves properly, so that the instrument enters into the abscess.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced physicians, and they are named Albared, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	These are made from three spices, of which one is major, and the others are minor.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced great, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced minor, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced pauc, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is advised that they be used for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are of the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like lions, as well as with large needles to which threads are attached. They are made of iron, or copper, or steel, or silver. The best are when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the experiences with black-feathered birds, which are agreed upon that for those in which fistulas in their cavities are open, they be reflected to those reflections by their lightness among those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the experiment with great lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the arrows are of three species. Some of them are simple, having only one curve, and are of three species: long, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have bodies of arrows, which are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those arrows having two curves are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them there are three curves, and of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single large curve, like this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single small curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single small curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium-sized curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small curve, like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large curve with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium-sized curve with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small curve with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large curve with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman's knee having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a knee in a female having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and drained, and they are of three species: one is large, female, and knee.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the female knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the knee knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those from which section is made are acute, while the others are blunt. They are not used in such a manner as to cause injury to veins or nerves during the incision of nodes, but rather for timely and gentle excoriation of abscesses, thereby ensuring the healing of the patient and some tranquility due to the mild heating effect of the procedure.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the knives, and they are of three species: large, female, and knee, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great abscess:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female abscess:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small abscess:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are caused by wind and resemble a red spot where the alcohol was applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if it is in the external side punctured with spatum hidden and there it flows to the inner and outer parts, when you want, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatum, which are hidden between the fingers and do not bother the patients, are of three species: great, female, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of windy abscesses, in which the flow of the pus is cut off, are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are caused by citrus wind, round of some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And ensure that these cups are of varying sizes, large, medium, and few, so that through those cuttings the flow of blood occurs quickly when needed, and when first applied there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those to cut the blood in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the knees of the legs and on the thighs, and on the elbows, and on the nipples, and on the abdomen, and on the armpits, and similar fleshly areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes small cups are made of those instruments, resembling scars, according to this form; through which the blood is cut when done by bloodletting, or through an incision in a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. xlvii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the nipples of men which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be full, and at times the breasts swell and are gathered in women, and Roman flabby ones, let them rest.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those for whom you have this, incise those areas where the lunar section occurs according to this form, from line .B. into line .G., then excise the tumor entirely, fill the wound with carnațious medicine, suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if the breast sags to the sides and is softened by its size as it does in women, then cut it into two layers such that each part contains the other. Ensure that one edge lies within the other according to this form between line .B. and line .G. Then excise the tumor which lies between the two edges of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and proceed with suturing and applying powders as previously described until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the patient's restlessness and flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it dissolves the flesh from the fat, and then properly treat what remains to heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the incision of boils where pus has left it dry.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These boils that the pus has left dry are of the species of scrofulas, tumors which contain a core that is extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, they must be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the boil of the suppurate has been evacuated, then you should fill it with cotton on another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the cotton be soaked and treated with ointment suitable for it until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is, then you incise there in such a way as we have said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the ulcer is extended to such an extent that it causes suppuration, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have said above.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur through an arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken, and the string which was over it is consolidated, then dark spots develop into abscesses. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when an abscess occurs from an arrow, it is long and aggregated in the front part of the body; and when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section over this abscess is error, and especially in those that leave the axillae, and the inguinal regions, and the neck, and motley places of the body; and if it is large, then one must ensure that its cure be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or the head, must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the cord; and place the section with incisions near the artery, and deliver the tunics where they are uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place an needle over that, and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which you will demonstrate in the extraction of two arteries, which are located in the temple area.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And place a point on the area which is between two threads with forceps to ensure the wound fills with blood, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer care in which powder is applied before the threads fall; and cure it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to venous drying, then you should have your hand where it is possible for you to grasp the abscess with the cord, and then insert the needle at the place where you held it with your hand, making that penetrate; and take out one on one side of the thread between which you extract the other from the other side, and tie the abscess tightly with good lint as I have said in the grapevine leather of two parts between two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the wax at the needle and remove all the abscess. You should make the initial incision of the needle, and strengthen your wax threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location such that when sitting on it, you should incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with garlic and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to nerve injury.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is percussion injury or injury due to excessive work, and similar cases.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most frequent in the areas of the joints or the thigh, or in any location where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the largest spaces within him. When pricked with urgency, pain seems to stun him.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that spreads throughout the body, and therefore, no chain reaction occurs, and he is inflamed in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which occurs in the joints should not be attributed to iron, for strong pain indicates contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More so is that which occurs in the head or on the forehead, causing a chain reaction with spasms.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the abscess is small, then apply heat and incise it with a scalpel.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then suspend it with forceps, incise it, and clamp it; stitch the wound, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have growths in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These growths are called funguals because they resemble fungi; the root of each is thin, and the head of each is large. The lips of these growths are convoluted, and some are small, while others are significantly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one myself, and in its abdomen were two growths that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with their thin roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those growths were convoluted and split, with moisture running from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and excised in the one foot having eighteen inches, and the other having six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, of fine fibers; then you incise it with a spathula, and let it be in your presence cauterized in the fire, for visible spots you should ensure the section is thoroughly burned to prevent infection; and if you see the pus, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the gout painful and fearful, avoid incising with a knife; instead, when you take lead juice made recently, strengthen that tissue, the manner of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, continue to strengthen the lead greatly within the tissue, even after it is incised and has begun to heal on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tissue is of coarse fibers, then in its incision there may be some cause for fear and panic, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible that you incise the soreness of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure what is within so that the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not incise any part that is of a dusky color, with little sensation, and looks suspicious, for such a part may be cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will add a reminder of the disease nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of swelling around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Swelling around the navel is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the cartilage which is above the abdomen, and protrudes the membrane or intestine depending on where the other ruptures are; or it may be due to a wound that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted fatty tissue.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a cartilage fissure and a swelling of the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, often appearing in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then place that part as we have described in greater diversity of position, and when you press that part against the thighs, it is concealed, and then return; firmly hold it there so, and make a strong movement for washing and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if due to humidity, then it is loose and not concealed when you press it with your hand, nor is it compressed or believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to scab, then in this case the abscess appears blackish in color declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if due to no flesh, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is inserted according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if due to humidity, then the touch of it is loose.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an arrow wound, or a vein, or due to humidity; then know that you must be careful about treating it, for there is fear and dread as you were taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arrows and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the fabric, then command the patient to hold their breath, and stand extended; and then touch around the entire circumference of the navel, and command the one standing between your hands to hold them in place, and surround with a wide strip over the area you marked with the touch; and extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch; and place something strong or soft on the way to bind decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the widest part of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger into that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already touched it and protected it with the membrane, then carefully extract it and push the intestine into the internal parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the fabric, then take it with an inch; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those strong threads, and insert two needles into the circumference you made around the abscess in a cross shape, making sure they penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, hold the needles and let the place where the extended flesh may fall in by itself; or incise that which is thin-skinned and let it flow out, and then cover it with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh nowhere in it or by humidity, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and drain the pus or moisture which you find in it, and then cover it with what heals and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol. liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of types of wound and in what manner medicines are used for their cure. And that it is sound in the wound to treat it so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that wounds are generated in the manner and care of their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some wounds are in places where it is possible to remove them entirely, such as with those in the breast or in the thigh and similar areas of the body, from which all of it should be extracted, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and hard, I cannot say that you have properties in it, for I cannot heal such a case nor have I seen another, or one that has been cured of this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation is when it is laid out as we have said, that you first prepare and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found to be filled with obvious blood.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which the operation will be located, and proceed with making incisions that lead to it; and then hollow out from all sides with the probe as good a thorough drainage as possible without damaging any of the vessels or organs.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if your cut into a vein or artery and causes much blood loss, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has stopped, and subsequently treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, as well as the cure for it using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of algithias alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hydrops, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility from another illness or another dropsy, such as in their coughs or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the illness of excessive virtue, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy alone, neither young nor old, then the method of the operation for it is that you lift the illness between your hands, and apply your hand to their abdomen to expel the water from their body, pushing the water out through the opening below the pelvis, and then take a spathula thorn according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a spear; merely however let it be in it some small shortness gradually, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and hurt it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you reach the section you should be about three digits away from the parts on the right side above the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not place your section on the side where the illness is located to prevent the superfluities from flowing to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the instrument through the entire length of the cord, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spear between the cord and the siphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an egg or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the cyst so that the pus reaches the desired location, and this is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is inscribed in the manner of a feather, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument above is a ring; when the instrument reaches the water, it soon begins to rise, so that it expels a small quantity of water through the middle opening. If you expel more from there than can fit in the hour, it will cause the patient great harm due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or it may lead to five signs approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But expel from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument and according to your understanding of the condition of the patient from the pulse and the quality of the instrument.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and remove the water which causes it, as soon as it is retained by the cord which draws it to the surface from which you have perforated it.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeatedly apply the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water but only slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and allow a large quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and washing with wet sand, and in the sun, wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the liver and gallbladder near the removal of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the cure of children who are born with the urethra not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the child is expelled from the mother's belly and the opening of her mixture is not perforated (or is sewn straight or does not return to its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, the opening should be perforated with a fine needle soon after birth according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a fine lead nail and sew it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate he should be helped to do so; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not sew the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that which you pull out should be sewn with a lead needle, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which it is pulled out of its place, are said to be caused by this: the one that is born during labor should have the end of the head of the birth canal sewn so that urine cannot pass through the internal parts; while raising the birth canal with his hand above the parts above; and it is not a generative matter, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its straight path, and this is a malady that lasts.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his side, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of percutia with a sharp blade, thus as if it were an incision of a feather, or any part you do not raz, so that the root thereof comes seeming like the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle place according to where it fits.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware in your operation for sand flow, if you notice any motes accidently fall into it; pause there and cover the area where you cut the sand, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albiter, which occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and involves corruption, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motes (particles) stuck in this albiter occur on the penis and form an elevated mass of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And of those two, the non-malignant one, you should suspend it with a fine thread and cut through that in which that monster is entirely contained; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at its beginning before it becomes consolidated; and then treat the part outside, for when you treat this along with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not become infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the testicles and in the black foreskin with corruption. Then you should reduce all that is already darkened and that is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，用蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、三种筛过的药草制成的。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then attend to the other cure while it is still warm.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it has broken out.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease canur through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce (where this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce is drawn, and no circumcision is required; and when such adhesion occurs due to the plague or an abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument while the adhesive substance is dissolved and the head of the abscess is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin and light, it is easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a thread of fine linen, which has already been moistened with the cautery fluid so that another swelling does not occur.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with astringents until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity in the same way as other ailments: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in infants, it is necessary that we assign to that the best operation and the most gentle method to preserve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not speak of circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of surgeons and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and toreros; and they use linen with honey and incision with unguals.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with lime or honey as a modification like with a unguent, for you will see the cord come out from above, for the cord of the prepuce is in two tunics, and the inner tunic remains, and it is necessary to make another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the modification which is done by alphecting, and is digital, of which cobblers use it, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not secure, for it often enters into the groove of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with an unguent, you must use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and most often does not require any modification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is done with scissors and lime or honey, its quality, I can describe from experience, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which reason the acuity above is as acuity below; and therefore when you press your hand proportionally to two acuities, and cut accordingly in one time; and it is made compression of the honey in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all sides, by which no error occurs at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay mainly if it is one that understands a little, that you do not do other than to tie the faeces in its bowels only, and let it remain for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that child happy in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place that child among your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than two hundred [steps away]; and hide the scissors in your hand or let him hold them, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the child's bowels and blow into the intestines, and pull that out so that it straightens the head of the bowels, and then modify that which is added to it by deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place marked with faeces in a double knot, and then tie a little below that one a small second thread, and then keep your finger on the location of the thread with good tension, and incise between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the thigh slightly and scratch the head of the vein; and let the bleeding proceed slowly, for that is better; and place powder above and over the powder put a cloth soaked in oatmeal cooked with olive oil recently pressed; and leave that there until the next day; and treat that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the fingers are not incised and the others are incised, let the shape of the tip be such that it forms a ram of the key, and let the length of the two points be as long as the length of two equal handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, the error in modification is that you may lift the intrinsic tendon entirely or partially, and you must incise it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, ensure that you extend the one of your hour with your finger in front of the incision site and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with the thumb and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the venereal disease abscess, then you let it until the abscess is punctured with a cautery, and excoriate that for ease, and cut it according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the swelling, for that will not be in it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that part where the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a thickened stricture, or a polyp or flesh growth, and resembles those we have described in the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being caused by a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then know that the patient has an encorbat over its nostrils.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his own buttocks and extend his belly from the part above his back, and the patient strain his leg as much as it is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is relieved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, then vigorously make the cause on the patient, then know that you should perform extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and should be very fine and slender like a catheter of an ostrich feather in thinness of a long ray similar to half a palm, with a very fine tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to evacuate the urine through this is that you take a thread doubled and tie it at the end with good knots; and insert the ends of the thread into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if any excess of the thread is needed. Then strongly insert the catheter with vigor, and quickly withdraw the syringe from the side and from the wood of the stool.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cut over the scrotum, and sponge the bladder and the groin with oil mixed, olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the forceps gently so that it reaches the root of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the point of insertion; and then push the forceps into it so that it reaches the bladder; and then push this one until it reaches the scrotum being directed to its proper place, and not the meat in which there is a tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then gradually insert the probe into the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract this and use a probe for irrigation with urine, use forceps, continue doing this until the bladder and scrotum are fully evacuated.
Capitol .lix.	Capitulum 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the irrigation of the bladder, use clamp forceps and similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burning wound there, or it is constricted by swelling, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	So that in the extremity of it, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three holes: two from one side, thus passes.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which what is enclosed is located, and according to its quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, then is drawn again, and when it is expelled for a long time, according to how it functions as a clampcedra upon which naphta in the battles of sea is placed.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, if you want to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed towards the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the cedar rod into the urethra as we have recommended in surgery; and then expel the humidity by what you expel, for that humidity will quickly reach the bladder, and the malaise ceases there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the urethra is subtle and through which the bladder is uritized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or tin, of which the head is either like a small feather or a little bulb, and place the cane inside linen.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of leather, place the humidity you want to uritize in the bladder, and tie it between two firm ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the urethra into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the humidity in a descending structure so that the malaise ceases as that humidity reaches the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a parchment piece, then take a piece of paper and make a circle from it; perforate that circle entirely round its circumference; then insert strong thread through those holes so they are turned around; then fix the circle in such a way as it is fixed alsofatur, but while you place where you want from the humidities, smell and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then attach that to the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand in such a way that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of pear.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of pear and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a pear generated in the gonads and a pear generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of it.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the pear for which the major operation and section are performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder is that which is inserted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am now narrating that matter in this exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most commonly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its joint, reddens, and is swollen; and often there is a sore in those areas.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in the young, it occurs halfway through those four years.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which has a larger stone, the cure is less easy; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the cure for that, begin with the treatment of gout by applying a plaster which extrudes all the fluid which is in their intestines; for that fluid sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and allows its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient's feet and ensure they are extended and flexed by hand so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it touches the ground a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place those cushions you have prepared under your hands, while the other servants remain in their positions, so that the bladder is made to hang downward.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply that and all that remedy.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the sole in the space, then immediately touch it with your hand.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel any difference with your touch, then anoint your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult, and insert it into the patient's anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And ensure the sole is in place by inserting your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually guide that finger into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts, see the place from which you made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to with his right hand extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand relax the cord which holds the genitals, at the part of the location where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatulum; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the groove of the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone which you said is at the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and not greater, for we carefully avoid making the section too large in the location of the anus, where the stone should be removed and the wound sutured.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And observe that from the stone there is some angle and margins, because the exit of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which seems like a lion's stone, and is round, and is made of it a slight exit.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if of that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if not so incised, then probe it with your finger or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the end of which should be like a file on which you strengthen the stone, and do not escape from it; or insert a thin instrument under it with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then enlarge it a little, and if you see a flow of blood, incise it strongly with vitriol trioxide.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it about there; and then press a little near that; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to incise that great section, for which happening to the patient one of two causes occurs: either it dies or it achieves continuous urinary distillation, by which the area is not totally consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the intestine when it is within and bring it back to its proper place, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract that which remains inside the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in infused oil and wrung water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lift the patient's leg on its pillow, and do not remove the bandage on the seventh day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, wet the area with water and much oil, and then cure that place with ointment containing diaphenicon and ointment containing diabazicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound there happens an abscess with suppuration and corruption, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder and thus urine excretion is prohibited (and this is known by the expulsion of blood through urine), therefore insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if remaining it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all species, using what is convenient for the cure while it is healing.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And observe the hours of the entire cure that you have made between the thighs and applied the medicines which are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine excretion is prohibited, then cure it by using what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this remedy are accused of causing dryness; and now I describe this: take a perforating iron instrument, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular excised piece, sharp, inserted in cloth.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it to the wound, leaving the stone there so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the wound, perforating easily where the puncture will reach the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And you rotate the puncture instrument with your hand around the stone little by little, and you complete the puncture on one side before making it penetrate on the other side; for the urine is quickly released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is left of the stone from the punctured wound in the wound, for that part is broken, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not possible for some reason you are unable to do it, then apply honey to the stone, and another piece of honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cover the stone in the wound with a dressing between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it there.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then separate the ligament and modify the seton, which is done in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need to use thread for the stone; it is done so that it does not return to the bladder, while the other ligament is placed above, for when the thread is separated near the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you thread the cord above, you must lift the needle to the parts above, or that it returns by your compliment, and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are not commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that a strong maiden who is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you will not find a good woman who can describe whether she does it for the doctor when she is chaste, or if she has done it with other women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation more.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a longitudinal section, and there is danger in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Yet if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek a wise and knowledgeable old woman, for she is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Yet if you are lacking in that, then seek a wise and subtle doctor, or present an experienced matron skilled in the treatment of women, or a woman who has partaken in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have her present and command her to do everything you will instruct her to do, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave its said part, and then command him to incise over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a stone, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and grasp it well with good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the opening of the bladder into the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise over that application of the material at the root of the thigh wherever it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that the said part is not moistened by the stone, cut it out.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that incision, and if it feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the grains of pepper are small: some are white and large, lion and sharp, long and round, and having horns.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know what grains of pepper are so that you may signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol tincture to the area for one hour before cutting the blood, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare among your instruments those mentioned in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that is cut, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow descent; and do not repeat this. Leave the pepper and do not extract it, for firmly removing it will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the heat of the pain in the blood subsides after some days, and the place permits, then you return to your operation while the swelling is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquous is nothing but the addition of humidity in the white skin, which is left by the bond of the genes containing the humor, and it is named ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper skin, which nature prepares at the parting of the humor, before it is cooked and another humor has taken its place; and this is the bond of the gene between the white skin, which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genes, because this material infiltrates them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion performed on the genes.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity having colored spots, its color may be gradually yellowish (citrine), or bloody, or red, or black floury, or watery white, and it is this that is most significant.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water addition is located are these: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an egg, and the genus appears, for the humidity contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round and divided from the egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the genus layer and the white cell, then cut away the membrane.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the humidity, you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess through a catheter whose form precedes; and according to what is seen in the passage of the catheter, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let him be placed on his back for a little while, and place your hand on the side of his body.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself on the left part of him, and command the minister to stand on his right side, who extends his staff across one of the sides at the hip bone and the lower part of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the hip bone in the middle location along its length near the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to the correct method, equally distant from the line where you should split the skin of the hip, until it reaches the white cartilage.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe it, and keep it for this: do not let your incision go beyond that; and your excision from where you have excised it should be suspended at the uppermost and subtlely examine it along the incision according to the quantity possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the cartilage full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labias of the section with forceps, and extend the flap above; and do not touch the cord around the genitalia, and incise the flap in that manner which is possible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin layer; for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you proceed with the procedure outside of its cord around the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the flap, return inside that, and carefully adjust the two labias of the cord around the genitalia with sutures, and carefully treat that as you would the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory, extract the vein, and carefully treat that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is found in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to how you have done in the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the blood, interpose in the sections soaked wool in oil or in rubbed oil; place another piece of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil above it, and spread that over two genii and the miracle of the belly; place further over cloths folded and powders, and lay those over bran which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two cloths and fill them with well-stuffed wool according to this likeness; make the ends which are pressed with a wedge or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the breeches, one end entering into the back, and the other attached to the crotch part, and place two ends on each side of the thighs, and two more ends on each side of the ankles, and all structures be secured in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of the opening; so you take a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white ciffe (a term possibly referring to a certain anatomical structure) containing the water is uncovered, and then you use the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then lance the blister with needles, and excoriate it with needles, and cauterize it with a fine ignited cautery; and incise that part according to what is possible so as to eradicate all of it; and guard it from the smoke that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from the risk of infection, and better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter a boil during the incision or during the cautery, or the risk of infection, then treat it as any other contraindication, applying the cure appropriate for it as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is faint, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I advise; and it is when you must certify, based on what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you must place the patient on an elevated bed, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the fluid.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the area carefully, touch it and leave it, so that the fluid can continue to flow.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And place something there to ensure the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if the condition is contrary to the discharge of fluid at that time, you perforate it: this is not done so that the white gauze in the openings of the wound causes a contrary condition and prohibits the discharge of fluid. When you must place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is drained by the hydroptics, the form of which precedes; or adjust something in the vicinity of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And observe that the fluid returns, and is well drained for about six months or until it is healed; when it is healed, then perforate according to that method, so that the patient passes their days thus.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about a flesh hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is danger of losing life through severe complications; for I have seen cases where the release of it and being saved were due to the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the tissues where the glands are present, and this occurs for several causes: either due to acute superfluous heat, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain does not affect it; it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess is firm when ripe, of which the color is dark, and there is no pain in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it occurs due to the concretion of arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as you can recall, or due to inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, which is due to the inflow of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the apasteam when we take those ties away; and note that you should not touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, which is due to the inflow of veins, it is not dispersed by any cause; you should apply compression with your hands.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that sectioning be done on this type and on the other muscles; you incise the cord of the tendons, then extend the heel above, and extract that from the white chip, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you deliver that from all parts of the heel.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the heel is already consolidated in those muscles, you should extract the heel and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any part of the chip, or between what is between the vessels, you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the native flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, then remove all that is from it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia caused by vitiation.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an aptestema enveloped by some envelope similar to a blister, and it makes exertional movement, exercise, and walking difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is fear of what preceded it, which is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, they should perform the operation there according to what was done first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should suture the patient's wound on an elevated cushion; and place the testicular suspensory ligament over the parts left; and have the codena of the inguinal canal attached to the tie downs that are tested for strength at the groin; and have another minister do this, extending them with a strong pull.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp blade through a transverse section along the middle of the vessels among which the vessels are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie one end of the thread at the beginning of the location where you have incised, and tie the other end at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location through a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the healing of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that it causes vessels which do not nourish either of the two elements, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you incise all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they shrivel due to the incision of the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and may atrophy, or that they wither away for this reason.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that descends into the cavity extending over the abdomen from the inguinal region of the abdominal wall. Because of this rupture in the intestines, some of the intestines protrude.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cavity or of its weakening. These two types occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from crying, from an elevation caused by some heavy reason, or from similar reasons.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the cavity, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that develops within the flesh, which the cavity compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to the weakening of the cavity; at first, it causes sudden and intense pain. It is an abscess that appears different from the surrounding flesh, and this is due to the pressure on the intestine, with the body's parts outside the abdominal wall.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the intestine or cloth is left out, and this hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Sometimes there is a distension, and sometimes it flows in the intestine's rift, where it is stopped, and this causes great discomfort to the patient. Sometimes it becomes painful, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is feared that the hunting in that area should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity using their hand at the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys on its own return, and then tie it over their collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's shoulders.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then stitch the cord which hangs above the scrotum at the upper parts, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then place it in two flaps of the incised section as needed to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if from that section according to the quantity that it is possible for you, let the humor be evacuated.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that scab which they leave from the cord of the testicles, while the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When you insert your finger into what is being excised from the testicle, into what is between the white scab, which they leave from the humor, and between the scabs, and release any adhesion that is in the rear part of the humor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place your hand on the rear parts of the testicles, and with this, spread the white scab with your left hand, and raise the humor to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look for your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard scab.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause of it, then strip that from the abdomen, leaving it out.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of thick wire, fashion one through the lower part of the scrotum, which is the securable section; and cut the ends of the wire that protrude inside where there are four wires, and place some of them on a cross-like figure. Attach this to the scrotum from which we said is located at the base of the testicles with strong ligature of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the wires and attach those with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels nourishing them can transmit any cause by which an abscess might occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature on the first one, about three fingerbreadths away; and between these two ligatures leave from the scrotum, which is located at the base of the testicles, the quantity of a finger's breadth, and cut the remaining part according to its roundness, and cover it with gauze.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut in the part below the base of the testicles along the section from which fluid and healing proceed as we have recounted in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And soon administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and some times the white paste is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of this fear of bleeding, because many times accidents occur there) and leave the plaster inside so that it may fall by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the application is delayed, then pour cold water and place it over that area until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And soon cure the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that was burned during the treatment.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for the hernia that is inside; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over there where there is facilitation; and then dry in the middle place by applying a poultice with what I operate there, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and cover the area with a cloth.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the genii do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the genii; and if they do, it is very little; and return them to their place at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, there is an adjusted fissure in the capsule through which to return the hernia into the capsule; and this happens due to the extension of the capsule, which occurs in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the capsule becomes stretched, and further, it softens, causing suppuration, and covering the area.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as in the preceding description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by applying iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your knees, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses emits by seepage according to the breadth as per the quantity of three digits.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And strengthen the white cloth that is under the cushion once it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And place the rod and hold it above the area where the cloth is emitting, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And hold the two emitting areas above the ends of the rod of the cloth, and adjust one to the other for suturing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And extract the end of the rod, and do not go beyond the limits of the cloth, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause like this, as I trust in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And cure that in the cure of the wounds, and as you incise the flaps, clean it and restore the wound while it is not yet consolidated; for the cloth contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proximate to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol. lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the scrotal skin becomes spotted or discolored in some men, it is mollified accordingly because the flesh between those areas is also mollified, and the condition of this is observed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is overseeing the treatment to have the patient lie in a position suitable for their condition, and completely expose the scrotum which is mollified over the natural scrotal skin; and then carefully suture the two edges together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, begin the closure of the excess scrotal skin with three or four stitches and a final suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then carefully cut between the sutures; and continue to treat the other wounds until they heal and the stitches dissolve.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol lxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember it in this treatise; and the remembrance of it is necessary for two reasons, one of which is that when asked about it as a doctor, one knows the cure for whom it happens. The other reason is that we may have necessity to castrate other animals for our young ones, such as bulls, goats, pigs, and similar to animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore, it is said that castration can be performed in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is performed by traction, the way of the operation is to tie the beast by its tail in water until the testicles are softened and relaxed.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are relaxed and do not appear to have marks upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration performed due to fissure and secution, ensure that you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those abscesses that have formed in each place.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise only the thin one which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles, because the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol.lix.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where a fourth testicle appears between the two testicles, resembling that of a female with its appearance.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that area in the region of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the swelling in the groin is such that it appears like two testicles of a man, slightly different in size, with some hardness at the outer part like the scrotum of a man with its two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you must incise those tight tissues where the tension of that area escapes, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the region of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On hernias and flesh protruding due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	If the hernia is firm, it is tight against natural causes where it is strained and appears legible upon examination; sometimes in women, it becomes enlarged to such an extent that it sags like in men and protrudes during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the superfluous mucus of the phlegm in your hand or cupped with your hand and removed.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with cupping, especially on the back, so that no flow of sweat occurs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the womb until it fills that space, and a larger cyst is situated outside according to the likeness of a coconut (and for this some first called it "hidden illness"); therefore, we should cut it as we cut phlegm, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the care of alum disease.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or is only slightly torn.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a malady which has preceded, and that one is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a thin or thick membrane.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the region of the kidney, or in its flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit coitus and copulation and childbirth, and especially you prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, promptly; but if it is not obvious, then you search for that among the thighs or in the groin.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a thin membrane, and is close to the two lips, then you open and rupture that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powders over the two lips, and then place your hands on the indices of both sides near them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force while that thin membrane is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised area from healing too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a lancet or a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the swelling is due to an abscess, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and resin, mixed with honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead tube to prevent the wound from healing too lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for a few days and administer water that has been boiled.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be cured with the other healing method for consolidation once it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural growth of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a malignant apstema, the apstema which is in the greater must not be treated by any method that could aggravate it.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapse and red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins around the anus through which blood continuously flows; and as for old hemorrhoids, they form piles.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and piles when in the pelvic region and do not appear to the touch, then no treatment should be applied to those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the pelvic region and can be felt by touch, these are the ones that should be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And when you place the woman in a supine position and extend her legs, or spread them with forceps or a rough cloth, and incise there where the veins are.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder the veins of one of the incised polvers' flux with seven bites, as if kissing and appearing to them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the soles of his feet for an hour, and place him in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and seeds of millet grass and of walnuts and of appearances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ocher and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two ventosas, and make seven incisions on the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of agrimony in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this be of sharp regard, cover that you insert what to you appears of it according to what I have said equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye in the upper part.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special cases of apstumas occurring in the upper part, such as carbuncle, apstema lapidatum, ulcer, adhubelatum, erythromenon, fistula hemorrhagica, and thyloides, and other apstumas.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these ailments and their special cases, as well as the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And cover that I mention in this treatise on apstema caut which appears in the upper part when it is one of the apstemas that usually heal, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if catz over it the sense, when no·t cuts of it, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must place the woman on a bench that has two benches; recline her on her side and adjust her legs to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs, and place her arms below her hips, and hold cushions with lint to what is suitable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife follows straight to the left and administer the instrument through the opening of the meatus, the shape of which will come in the cases that will be discussed later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it on the right side of the meatus of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the meatus should not be more than the width of the meatus and help the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the mouth of the uterus, then cover it with powder over the mouth of the uterus so that no instrument can enter.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Cover it so that the vitriage that runs in the instrument of the lute above remains covered, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vitriage until the orifices of the uterus are open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and is touched with the hand and is hard and moist, then cover it by drying that part of its head with spit.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the foulness is evacuated, then cover it by placing a sponge soaked in olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency in the area at the mouth of the uterus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the uterus in position and over the pubis, a clean cloth soaked in water in which vervain has been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is usually cured in about two days by applying an ointment that you should use until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and the wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and vinegar, then immersed in water in which pepper or long pepper has been boiled, and then returned to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep within the liver, then avoid any treatment of it for now, taking care to follow what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol. 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives how to properly treat miscarriages when they occur according to an unnatural process.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the sign of a natural birth by its symptoms, for when you see the female expel from her parts and desire to smell the air, and she is refreshed by what comes out of her, and quickly brings forth the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion of it is above her head, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, at once hold the abdomen so that the fetus descends lightly; when it presses on its head, deliver the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities by good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and unmentionable, for when the fetus sits on its feet and the body of the mother is sitting in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or the hand of the mother, or at the side of the mother, or the head of the mother, or the hand of the mother, or over the abdomen of the mother, and strong it is turned over its own back, resembling the unmentionable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those, and which engine is in them so that it may be significant by this and be placed there.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is sitting on its head by natural means, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then apply that seser, or what women have for it, and evaporate the congestion with fenugreek and with humid oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the probe between his said spinal spaces slightly and separate the second one, or dry that one with its finger tip, through which drain what is within of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be anointed with a mixture of pigeon dung and fenugreek.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, using the fumigant, to inhale it while in a certain condition; and keep her mouth and nose covered for about an hour, until the fetus passes.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both halves of the fetus have passed at the beginning, then cause her to pass them gradually little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a pillow and lift her feet off it, and hold the pillow above the ground; and keep the woman so that she does not fall due to the vibration.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside and the cut is deep, then incise there and extract the remnants of the cut or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be for removal.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the cut extends to its feet, then push those parts back in, and gradually reduce the size of the cut, and finally take a piece of it and extend those parts little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it extends into the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that discharge external, for that will be for removal if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not removed by what we have recommended, then return the cut little by little until you pause it according to its natural figure, for that will be easily removable by slight incision.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and crush it well in the mortar for good pounding, and then apply it to the inside of the woman's thigh, just below the belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then perform that operation in clear water, when he has achieved the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts around him have become numb, then perform a mirtle fumigation under him and place it near him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have kept the fumigation for an hour, then perform the operation on a cushion, and then perform that evacuation and extend the mouth of him, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of his abdomen, which will soon produce flatulence.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Passage the flatus through his nostrils and anus.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the flatus passes out in this manner, then gradually insert his anus; and then let the woman sit astride his back, with his feet on the ground, her hands supporting him, and complete the insertion.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then apply pressure to his abdomen gradually, and when the feet are placed between the armpits, prepare them for insertion below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not dressed, then take the feet and move them with vigorous movement, and place what is on the sides of the hypochondria gradually close to where the wound protrudes above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and carefully close the wound little by little, and command the woman to express herself while the wound is not dressed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her urinate.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot urinate, then apply pressure to the abdomen, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then administer linaments which you have prepared from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then apply pressure to the abdomen, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to breathe deeply while the wound is not dressed.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Raise the foot above the heart spread wide his hands and the foot's ligament is at the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Hold that the midwife has the foot and then slowly rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equal and then place over the wound what we have recommended of oil and linseed.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be gently moistened little by little, and when you have done this, place the sponge on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the wound, and then command that it be warmed; and make it breathe with a flatus.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus prepared for exit is on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother experiences convulsions in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the child, then incise the strangle vein to ensure it is not obstructed and causes death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside, as you place that [fetus], and order the woman to hold herself several times, and let it slip out-gently, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of two infants or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twin spots several times are natural, and sometimes they may be born three or four at once, but this is strange and hard to determine. Mostly these are causes from nature, and not harmful.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied by a second one, and they are separated by cipha (a ligature), distinguishing those between the ligaments in the navel of each. Sometimes they are naturally expelled several times as if it were a fetus gently, and some times they are retained for an indistinct time as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult, some of them you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about non-natural figures, then cure those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes embryos are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, and more ten, and you must verify that one female aborts with a vi, and another with all formed x, the cause of which is made by the measurement of glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who fortifies that part seeming to her, and then places her hand on it knowing well.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery manually. You must consider whether the woman is of good health and not among those accidents for which her life is feared to be in danger.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is placed face down on the board on her back, and her head is bent forward and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold that part with two hands or tie it to the board so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and honey, as well as with juice from chicory and sesame.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with ease in the mother, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of its neck, or on its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave the beard area, or on the furcula, or at the appropriate locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the discharge is from his feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And ensure that the finger is held with the right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the finger with ease into one of those locations which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, so that it is in equal apposition, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be held at all times, so that the discharge of it is alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And ensure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them to what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the bowel is left outside, let the fingers remain inserted in that place for now; and do this until all the bowel is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it until all of it is expelled, and incise it at the junction of the hand or near the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the bowel is large, or there is constriction during insertion, or it contains fluid pressed tightly, then you must insert spitted wick between the fingers, cut open the head, and drain the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the bowel is naturally of large size: then you must incise it with a sharp instrument, or use an "alundat" as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the foramen, when the humidity from the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor susceptible to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what seems appropriate.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the swelling of the abdomen is suppurated or in hydroperitonium, then you should perforate it where the humidity is located.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fistula is near their feet, then the attraction of it is slight and its direction to the mouth of the vein is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is compressed, you should incise the abdomen and feet, when you withdraw that which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where that which is within flows.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs are stretched and the head is turned, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand into the vein's proximal part, and search for the head, pulling it with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two forceps, and pull them with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted by an abscess, cautery the one that occurs to him; ensure it is not irritated; first, do so in order to administer effusion of fatty humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on his side, then if possible, incise it: and administer what we have said about the living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then incise it in segments, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the uterus.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply compresses of astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her belly where one child was dead, and near that fire another pregnancy began, and the fire is dead for the second.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess in the groin; and inflammation begins within that open fire, and starts to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied over it several causes of strong attraction, and extracted one bone, and after some days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, for in the belly there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, the woman existing in her belly's many dispositions, and I had seen such a manner for a long time, corrected it with a small incision.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not administer treatment as strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to what the physician accomplishes with his hand for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form for vomiting in which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a strengthener in which you tie the ligaments, with which tying there are two vertiges at the ends of two flets.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, let this vertige be more subtle in texture, and made of hemp or the wood of young plants.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each flet be as wide as two fingers, and the edge on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle location between two flets are two fastenings of that same type of flet, which are already secured, with their length being about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional elements should be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they are open when you reverse the two prescribed vigors.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that, but finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of silk thread or linen thread according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of each, make two additional elements as you see, and the length of these elements is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the uterus before the forceps do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vigor which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of supporting which contains the great head
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fishhooks, into which is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of supporting light:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which has closing teeth such that the head of the fist is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities such that the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind are multiplied, the artisan should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more to the people in quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that procedure with caution, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this she delivers, it is well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a hole and place it over the herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rhubarb, anise, camomile, scidax arabic, and cinnamon bark and santuaria.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cane cannula in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that so that the vapor comes into the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that snuffing as we have said before, and the second one should be administered quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this method for this cure does not succeed, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or aleppo cotton, and then insert it into the wound and seek out the second one, and do as you have found. If it is attached in the region of the mother's hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the mother does not fall due to the strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you insert it into the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction so that it obeys and prevents adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with snuffing and treatment with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if none of the causes we have recounted are outside our consideration, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead anoint that area with ointment and tetrafarmakon; for that will allow it to dissolve and be forgotten over a few days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when you permit it to resolve, apply the fomentation to the head and stomach, which leads to the illness; then it is necessary that suitable sub-fomentations be administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already prescribed sub-fomentations with nettles and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fomented, you should retain the menstruation and the second flow:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the thin end inside the cone and the broad end over the fire, and position the sub-fomentation above the flames.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while the subfumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child moves about and its anus is not perforated, which have already been cauterized with a fine and hot instrument.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her said cauterizing instrument; otherwise, use a sharp spatula and ensure that it does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place it over the wound soaked in oil and wine; afterward, apply ointment to it while it is warm.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it has been burned, then place a catheter for several days to ensure the child can pass urine.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if an anal fistula occurs for the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and afterward treated as we have said for treatment and lead powder.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that discharge.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that discharge pus below are nodotic and gross, those that discharge near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or spots.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodosity is old and flows from watery white or subtle rot, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is caused by them through the discharge and by wind condition; sometimes the patient complains of the discharge, and strongly suffer from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to know whether a penetrating fistula goes into the buttock or not, you should insert your finger into the buttock and gently probe with a fine stick of reed or iron in the fistula when there is no pus.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is hardness, then insert a thin rod of lead or horsehair between that tent and feel the rod or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and there is no cause for obstruction or worm or hardness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrant, and then apply a remedy.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then its significance is dysuria from that and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrant into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign thereof is that the probe passes into here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that pus comes out continuously; and that it does not respond to that medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the cure of these is hard work and the diligence of the surgeons over them which must be firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, heal them with iron as I will recount to you later, and what I have already said and advised.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs between them, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and near insert a lead tube or an iron one if it is in the tortuous fistula, so you can feel the place where the tube passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert the thumb as directed into the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the thumb that the tube is already by itself fully exposed and penetrating, or if you feel something between the thumb and the siphac or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing does not occur there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it is healed in some men after the third day.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which hope is given of healing, you should use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula as described before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the bowels; then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjacent to the fistula are thoroughly cauterized and appear like feather reeds.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that which is with bands wrapped around the limb until all those tissues that are cauterized are healed, and then cure that which is with medicines, the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will not be cured in some time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tent enters but does not penetrate deeply, you have described it as being in the anus. Between that and the tent which is often a veil of flesh or cloth, sear the fistula in what sieves the surface of the canal, then dry the canal from the beginning of the fistula, and dry the tent itself, ensuring that the drying reaches the location where the tip of the tent passes through, thereby freeing and cauterizing it.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are similar to a penile canal and do not rupture from any of these causes.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if a flow of blood comes between you and the operation when inspecting those tissues, then as soon as possible and with the lightest and gentlest instrument, cauterize it either with fire or with sharp medicine. For the fire cautery makes two good adjustments: it adheres to those tissues adjusted, and stops the bleeding through the excision of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is caused by water bags enveloped in border or in a triangular cut where the area gets inflamed, and then immediately cure the wound with a strong flesh-generating ointment.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines which have stiffness and excision; when restoration is restored, it is healed, and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already pierced through to the perineum and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the perineum and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if there is an attempt and between you and her it is veilment of cloth or of skin, and is close to the penetration, then this operation is not performed in her but according to a way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer in her one of three ways: or cauterize that thus as we have said; or secrete that until you achieve the cavity of it so that it may be possible for you to insert something and the cure; and do not proceed by incision lest you wound the uterus containing the child, and operate against the will of nature; and then cure that as we have said which is strong enough to be healed; or extend that veil and cleanse that until dry near the anus, thus as we have said, or attempt or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and then modify those fistulae which are in the section where you can by percrustation; and then strive to perform the restoration of all the wound by incision, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the opened fistula at the part of the anus, and it will be easier for nature.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cavity of the buttock near the surface of the body and at the edge of the buttocks, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it there with threads or around those; then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates near the edge of the buttock inside, then you extract the thread from that, doing so as you insert your hand into the buttock; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more flesh is incised, strengthen that part where the flesh is incised between the two ends of the thread.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the inside so that you do not injure the skin; then apply something to promote healing.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spinal spike where the fistula is divided: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, thus you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain in the incision of those areas.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds: one where the part between the buttocks resembles charcoal, or those that are like the fat of a date fruit.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, they can be small and large, and the pain from them comes at times and is one, as well as marks, and around the anus, in the extremities thereof.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But the ones that are around the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellow water or a little of continuous blood flows, and are according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the womb is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze between when the womb contracts and the veins appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you lie down and hang by the wrists those that you have there on your fingers, and immediately cut their arteries.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the wrists are not held there by their moisture and softening, then take those by a rough cloth or cord or a slit piece of woolen cloth, and tie them at the places called ties, and immediately cut them and sprinkle over them some powdered caustics near the incision, so that they act on them as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And immediately treat those by another cure while they are healing.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite from a cauterizing instrument, and wash it with the fluid in the womb that yields slightly to evacuation when the patient bears down.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you should grasp them with your finger or grasp them with forceps, insert them, and later cure them with what we have said when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from the surrounding parts, and make the thread penetrate through the other part. Wrap both ends of the thread around the part beyond the needle, and do so longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with firm structure, and later secure the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a hot cloth soaked in olive oil or ointment on the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which is inside remain; when it is ripe, cure those with ointment or some other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Accidents caused by the opening of a wound or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and do not heal well with that medicine, it is custom to cauterize them with the point of a spatula or with your finger until they become moist, and then let the edges grow over them; which you prevent from consolidating. And then cure those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you cauterize them with stronger heat than the first time when they start to bleed and become excoriated; then cure those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of abscesses, this is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not something else but a round swelling according to the color of the body, resembling a walnut. It forms throughout the body but especially in the parts where you have the feet and fingers, and because of these pains, you must treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut what is in the circuit of the key, hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a small sharp, round fistula protrudes on the surface of the body, and red spots indicative of inflammation appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and cut that, or to tighten it with a needle or with a thread that holds it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the affected and unaffected areas are eradicated with the instrument which we will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a large fistula or protrusion is found on the surface of the body, often accompanied by pain. When you touch it, it resembles the bite of a ant, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for this is that you take a needle of steel or iron, make it sharp, and place it over the blister between which you contain the circle of the needle from the sides of the patient; then rotate your hand around the needle while inserting what is within the circuit of the blister, and pause it in the depth of the flesh, and that you eradicate the blister from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of reed or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (that is, non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the finger is covered and the rotation of that [needle] is unobstructed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described earlier in the cauterization of athylos on the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments you are administering to give cauterization.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cauterization is performed with silver or tin or reed that has been melted or beaten; sometimes it is done with those instruments small and large according to those being administered, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are inflamed or painful, the cauterizations of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of pressing great and slight:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, narrowing to subtlety; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one being a little smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm's length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with several openings as it is twisted; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert strong raw honey into those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or around that amount. Adjust the bag to that; when the bag is placed inside, it should be straight in the head of the catheter between two distinct points with a strong constriction, and then catheterize each opening: More importantly, the quality of catheterizing each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and make sure it is neither too thick nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	E aprop the malade be resupinat sobre seu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to vomit, have the amount it can bear; and if it sleeps all through the night, it will recover more quickly.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you operate on that person for the belly discharge disease and vomiting of its stomach, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine and sharp needle from the needles that children are accustomed to.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what pertains to the free treatment and medicines according to necessity.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a knife or sword incision, or a lance or rod blow, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More specifically, the wounds that occur in parts of the body are thus: a wound that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, or something similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am therefore recounting the treatment of some wounds so that you apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the recall of compounded ones will come at the start of the third decapitation.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when accidents occur in the head with simple pain and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and has already struck the brainstem just superficially and is a large wound and you fear a subsequent dangerous abscess formation, then you should examine and incise the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract from there as much blood as the virtue of the wound allows, provided no cause prohibits incision, especially if the blood discharged from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the incision is made on the opposite side of the wounded area; and one must guard against swelling and edema from fluids and large foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the wound, if an abscess is forming, apply cold compresses with olive oil or with wine that contains tincture.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if recent with its own serum and the air has not changed there apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or due to a puncture and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will describe about their suturing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not retention of it but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise that area and properly treat the wound with medicines, restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which they are accustomed: bread and form such food as resembles them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all of that, remove it, and properly treat the wound.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plaigas the artery or vein from which the flux of sanç can occur is present and cannot be abscindied by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that un-abscindied one, then you incise it with a spatum or ligate it; if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not agree, then you cauterize between where the sanç is abscidied.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plaigas are simple and small, then the cause is light; sprinkle this powder over them when the air changes to harden those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, sanç of dragon divided two parts, and caus no-extincta divided three parts; let all be mixed thoroughly and sieved, and fill the plaigas with it, and confine it well within a good covering until it adheres over that and coagulates with the sanç.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then dry it with powder and leave it, and do not disturb it while it is not yet dried, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done alone with a cautery, when the heat of dragon's flesh is not at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on large wounds when you judge it necessary to close them up straight and to stretch the edges, especially for recent wounds whose edges the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then I do not fix the position of this poultice. But then treat those as we have said, try placing your hand on those ulcerated wounds or place a poultice made from flour of rye in water and honey that generate heat; and place the other treatment where it will heal completely.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the wound on the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the treatment for fractures of the skull in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Moreover, if the pain occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head pains when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Moreover, if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no engendration but that it should be avoided, curing it in such a way as to make vehement styptic treatment, just as zinc and zegi are like them and quince pectin resembles these for protecting the nerves and counteracting those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause over the pain from cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the seat of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as being washed in lukewarm water twice, sometimes infused in oil roasted or unroasted, and thyme when washed in lukewarm water and the other feet immersed according to this method, and apply a moisturizing ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	Moreover, if the pain is great, then administer缝合，或收紧其边缘，然后在其愈合时用粉末治疗。
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the fundament, then puncture there at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already incised in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that area, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the spinal cord are already incised or all are, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the chain and suture over the spine and do not touch that; beforehand equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a decent structure, and let it be for some days; afterwards cure that with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already infected the bone, then probe that area, and if it contains fragments of bone, extract all that you can from there; what your hand cannot reach, leave it until the wound suppurates, is separated, and the inflammation around it subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that is recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it as described, of which the remedy will be mentioned shortly in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and are caused by spear or by sword or by lance or by similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the depth of the wound is significant, then consider more if there is flaccidity from the injury; then you know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder for the first hour, and do not press too hard so that the blood does not remain deep in the wound and return to the heart, which could worsen the injury; instead, apply attractive ointment, and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then you should place it on the wound for a while so that it exudes what comes from the humidities; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is within him flows into it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If, however, three days or more have passed since the onset of the disease and no spasms or heart tremors nor constriction of the lungs occur, and if other good dispositions of his body persist, then you may conclude that the disease has subsided; then treat both with calx and another form of cure until he is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of his body is impossible, and the wound has been open for too long, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the disease is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already formed an abscess in the bone, and you are now incising the pus, then you should torque the disease and cut to extract those pus pockets, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then let them be as the disease liquefies, for their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of pain in other members, the treatment in cure is what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, slight, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great pain, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine is affected, so that there is an intervention in them and their sutures become more violent and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method. I suspect that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not prevent the intervention in them from reaching their place soon, as they open and become swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is intermediate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and apply to the sutures of other bodily wounds.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate to the other wounds, more properly in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you concerning each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and is blocked by some part of the intestine through it, and it becomes difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then you should soak that attempt by submerging a sponge or a moist cloth in clear water alone, or in water with squinancy, and spicery, and mix those in which the swelling may be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, I have seen it where there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone in resolving the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the swelling be resolved, then moisten the intestine in water in which it is immersed with mallows, for by this the instrument of the patient is alleviated due to little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then incise the disruption a little with a sharp instrument where veins are embedded.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary cure is better when it is proper that no section is made, and there is no occupation to dry up nearby and in case of deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, note its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part is not acute. The tip is fine, but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, since the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do this over the area, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for a while so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And you should apply this to large wounds and to moderately sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then have the minister place it so that he holds the disruption entirely with his hand and adjusts the edges of the wound, and then uncover that to this one who needs the suture for any other reason nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the holes according to the width of the wound; then leave the tip of the disruption at the end of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or ensure you do not put a stitch in both ends of the cut, but place two ends of the thread from the inner parts, before making that penetrate from one part to another; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the clip, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, sometimes two parts at once, and properly join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; then let the thickness of the digit remain and put another needle in that place, and properly attach that with thread as you did with the first needle; do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the flap is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in threading, so it is necessary that they be of medium thickness in terms of fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the thread close together, for then the flesh would be penetrated lightly and the flap would heal before its proper consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the sutures too much so that the flap is not prevented from proper consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then penetrate the ends of the needles so that they do not slip out of their proper place; and place powders expanded from all parts over the sutures, which contain the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the flap is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, as only one or two needles are needed for their stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is as follows: and you perform the suturing of the four extremities, from the edge and two extremities of the flap, in one go with a needle wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have the needle penetrated these four extremities, bring the needle back from that side of the cut where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the wound, making the stitch like a stitch in cloth where the threads are taut.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the width of a small finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I closed the wound that was inflicted upon a man in his abdomen, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of the major wound measuring about one palm, situated around two palms from the center of the abdomen; and it was the disruption in the middle of the member. And then I returned that part after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound is consolidated in the space of about fifteen days, and cure that and it is healed; then those viscera are returned to their positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for I did not cure that without ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would two days a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two species of suture properly according to the word of narration.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from the outside through to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along the length of the entire body according to the straight path, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside through to the outside in the other end of the stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same extremity of the limb from the outer part to the inner part; leave the end of the probe in this lateral position, and insert the needle into the other internal part from the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the probe in the extremity of the limb which is in the lateral part until all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this metal side and close it at the extremity that is of the probe in the other lateral position, extract the needle from the hole which you have penetrated, and return it to the hole on the other side of the limb; then extract it from the hole which belongs to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do it another time or twice more as you sew all of the outer part according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with sutures of thread on which you sew the skins, ensure that you sew the probe one time from the part of the extremity of the hole, and leave the other stitch until after you complete the suture.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suturing which Gualia uses and is from his own experience involves sewing that according to a certain seam. You should sew it with a seam that a skilled surgeon sews, ensuring that all parts are added to their corresponding part suitable by nature; and apply the extremity of one part to the other extremity of what you are suturing, and this is done as I have advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the extremity of what you are suturing from the outside, and make it penetrate into the inside part at that point. Leave two ends of the thread; then, turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside again through the other two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those threads, and make each part penetrate from the inside into the outside through the other extremities of what you are suturing, which are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common loose suture, and it is the suture about which I have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that the ventral suture is corrected with two needles, so you must introduce into these some thread, and begin with the needle insertion of what you should, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the sutures of those which equalize the tissues.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suture of this area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More the judgment of plague treatment is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That cause is when you obtain the recent plague from its own excretions before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, suture it, and apply it properly, then pause over that with a flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that with some ointments which must be present until they form hard crusts and solidify the threads, and be consolidated tightly; and cure that as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for a while, until he begins to shiver or sweat much, and change that every two hours during the day, as I have shown you, until he is healed, in which case you would not need other medications for simple ailments.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the infection may spread to the main limbs, then you should soak linen in good-quality olive oil or in rubbed oil, and place it over the areas between the joints and leave the ointments.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then you should apply this several times a day, crush that am powder stiptic black terebinth, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exiture penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the large intestine is more lightly healed than that from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine called "gorgono" does not receive healing from any infection that enters it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the fine nature of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are dealing with is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the recent (fresh) one, treat that according to your discretion with which you return the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed into the space and is already red or black, when you stretch that with astringent over the area that is darkened, to cause flux of pus, since in the skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut out what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut edges of the wound, so that over you the attraction to it may be alleviated by the closure of the skin and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is sometimes possible to reduce it in some people, for this reason I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by a lance, and the wound was old and caused a fistula, and healed from the treatment and distension.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not yet cured in the healing, but strive to subtlely place that which is healed by fire and the site is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I see the site already consolidated, apply heat to the patient that reaches over the ailment and affects his abdominal region; and do not allow any to suffer from this ill accident and weaken in their mental dispositions eating and drinking, and moreover immerse in baths and excessively exercise his words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when there is a small swelling in the intestine, then you should bind it in this manner: and you take fireflies from large caps; and place one of those fireflies with its mouth open over the two lips of the swelling; therefore when it lights on those and strongly opens its mouth, cut off the head of the firefly, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another firefly near the first one, and do not cease to put fireflies there until you have done so according to the quantity of the entire swelling.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and the wound; and extracting those adjacent capsules within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not damage the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be filled with subtle pills made from the adjacent intestinal tissue, which is more like a needle; and you take the end of these intestine pills, making it fleshless, then place the end of it in the pill of lead, wrapping it, and then insert that pill into needles and through the intestine, reducing it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with needles is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engendration only inflammation, and does not heal from it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when enveloped and allowed to remain ancient, forming an ulcer, and not being consolidated, continually discharges pus, then in whatever member it is, universally it is named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, a fistula is a hardened, white node, upon which there is no pain and which is contained as is the cavity of an aisel; for this reason, they call that place a recess, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people it is wet, the one that gets sore; and if the moisture is strong, it is absorbed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this moisture is hot, and small, and large, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously mentioned in the division, when I spoke of ulcers, that every ulcer which is not healed nor is only raw flesh, is this due to one of nine causes: of which one is either from a lack of healing in the body; or from its malice; or because between it and the skin there is hard flesh prohibiting the natural growth of flesh; or because it is hot and coarse; or because that ulcer itself contains corruption and the matter that flows from it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption occurs in the region, with pestilence; or by virtue of the region, as in Saragossa, where there is a difficult digestion of ailments, and the healing of an abscess is delayed by nature; or because there is bone in it or coarse bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And cover thus so that you may know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for some fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal bones, or to some joint composed thus from the hand and the foot; and these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And of these fistulas, those that proceed in this manner are among the maladies difficult to cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation; for such is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then try with a rod or a probe, and if the fistula follows a straight path, you may inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a thin lead wire, for lead has lightness due to its nature and is bent to alleviate and straighten the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then chrystone the openings with their own openings, for the humidity by which you chrystallize the former will affect the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner by which you can know if here are os or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula of openings alone, over which you apply your full strength, through your inquiry, in which you question the patient, and by which you determine the movement with your compression on the area, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes in true posture, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is a apparent nearby fistula or in a local place distant from joints, or from nerves, or from arteries, or from veins, or from one of the places which I and you call.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the opening of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preone until it is as far as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by using iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then you inquire about that dry and that wet one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main member as we said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must probe thoroughly where the corruption has spread entirely; and then treat that part as the flesh within it becomes healthy.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healthy and you graft on another piece of flesh as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you uncover again and thoroughly examine the part, and reason about it and purify it with your final strengthening treatment, and then restore that area.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, that is good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should simply leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is bones that are displaced, then you must carefully extract all of them, and from none of them do you leave any cause for concern due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if it is due to some cause of humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those membranes or flesh if they are adherent, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if it is not the time to expose the bones at that moment, then pause over the wound that you may allow the part to heal there, and leave it in such a way that what remains is near those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section that you have incised during your operation constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If there is fear, pause over the wound submerged under a warm bath of oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some other green ointments, until those membranes are ready, and the bones are free from them. Then remove the dressing, and the extraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the hip or rib or resembles those, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface, then quickly apply that resin only behind where the darkness and corruption are obstructed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and excise all around the place where the corruption has spread, and then cure that once it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that, when dealing with a patient in the thigh, you place it as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and the affected parts inside are over the matter inside the body where the matter has spread to the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess is allowed to mature due to the error of the doctors, and the matter begins to drain, and its cure is nearly paused as the thigh becomes fistulized. Make in the pus orifices all of which exude pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor with much effort for two years around, and not fire in those who knew more in the art, within which I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there is the leg and the materials that flowed from it through those openings; and already the condition of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of his was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that could be reached from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I lifted and incised over one of the openings through which I could describe a part of the bone, and found that corrupt tissue, which was already foul, rotten, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already deteriorated where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I ligated what to me was discovered and prepared from the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I concluded that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which will be excised and ligated. And I had already decided.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then proceed with the restoration of the wound using consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you should iterate and uncover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And ligate what appears to be that corruption, and then you should proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not yet restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you should uncover the other side and not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration, but it is not yet restored until you incise around one palm's width of it. And then extract its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the section of it but for the disposition of the femoral vein and for the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, since it accedes in all hours due to excess of evacuation, causing bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of good flesh; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is conversed in his dispositions and not made against him in movement nor damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is protruding in a place already damaged, then you must correct it in this manner: take hold strongly and firmly at the extremity of the protruding bone, command someone to extend it; put a larger piece of woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone was left, and extend its end so that it draws the flesh towards the left place. Then uncover the flesh over the area you wish to suture so that the needle does not pierce the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board properly over the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to sew the broken flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And ensure that the suturing is over the broken area little by little, for if the corruption is within the bone's cavity and does not appear in its manifestation, you must force another round of suturing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and not protruding, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fustes, and then saw through the first part where the corruption is inside while ensuring that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be slightly smaller according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but is displaced.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the chest, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and drain it according to any disposition which is within your capability. In each case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience in the ways of ailments, then when you have them, apply what is convenient for it from the instruments for every ailment.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall know at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as simples from which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience with the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another will be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the prongs of a staples.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not apply them otherwise than to have those of the joints rubbed when they are corrupted, or to the large open wound.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of the razor larger than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of the broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another properly made saw: let it be an arc of wood, and the sharpness of it of iron, and the handle of it of well-made knife wood.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor or something subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which to cut the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its end is like a point, and it is placed in certain locations in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray which you place according to the ratio of that perforated bone:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and resembles a cavity like all the causes we have said regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the cutting edge and the joining of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have treated that corruption with medical remedies and the treatment did not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption departs from the member without any apparent cause, so you must delve into that member to find the corruption, in order to expel the evil through death or malice, which is a greater misfortune for the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of him upon whom this occurs is that the member turns black before it is cooked as if by fire already burning, or you may notice the blackness near it where that burning has entered that part and affected the whole body; therefore, examine that member closely.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, the corruption may be caused by the impact of certain venomous substances such as those from a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the axillary region, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm's basin.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then at that point it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly handle the foot when corruption prefers the toe of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the toe, then incise the leg between the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already permeated the toe, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the ligament in one part and let go the one you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the assistant's hand with a ligament to the parts let go, and extend the assistant's other hand with another ligament on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is exposed between them; then it should be incised or closed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a piece of cloth covers all parts so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you happen to bleed when working, then cauterize the area intensely, or place some astringent powders on it to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured member with a ligament as is convenient, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if someone finds a black spot on their foot, this incident which we have both observed, is a quarell caused by burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said tissue where it tends all over the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares himself to wait until the cure goes to the member with the intensity of his pain from both the pain and the inflammation, and the swelling of that foot into the joint, and the wound heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time that corruption accidently affects the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I perform the reflection to reflect that superfluity onto what is held over the hand of the medicines; in advance of the body's purification. And the superfluity is not reflected but begins to go into the other part where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they make me incise the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that superfluity, rather than fearing the cutting of the hand of the patient will result in death, as the virtue of gout was paramount.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that person prepared and incised his entire hand, and he has healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide so that it may be understood and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of cathartic preparations with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains as if it were a vessel, and the cloth above it is thus like a thin covering, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor on muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption presses on any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely thus as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the stone adheres and that the corruption has not reached a serious consequence, and on the stone there has passed through from above, then you cure that with a colostomy.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the hand that smells has a fetid odor, then treat it with a colostomy using a medicinal remedy of Egyptian origin which consists of oil and wine mixed with honey, with equal parts, and be sure to place them in a vessel, and let them boil over the fire until the medicine becomes strong and reaches the desired consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; and treat the sinus with this remedy, strengthen its openings, and leave the medicine in it for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine completely; and do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the swelling subsides.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is treated with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take the ash from vetches, put it in water; and then extract that and treat the sinus with it until you are certain that the sinus has cleared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed in seven parts, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to modify and wash, and wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer that enema with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take yafinicon ointment, dissolve that mixture with diluted oil and stringy wine; or you administer that enema with several medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinew is wide enough to receive the catheter of the enema, then gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and place it in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is large, then you should suture the lips of the wound and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the stream can flow into it. When the stream is restricted in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area below as you wish, then you should puncture the member for preparation so that the stream flows slightly from it according to what is at your disposal and that no cause of obstruction restricts the flow of the stream.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in accordance with what you want, extending them over cloth lint.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such great quantity as to communicate with the entire sinus; then cut with the scissors on the right side of the opening of the sinus a slit slightly wider than the opening of the sinus; then extend over another piece of cloth the lion ointment according to the amount of the slit, and place it above that in a position far from the opening of the sinus so that the discharge of the stream is alleviated and does not disturb the cloth greatly but for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is over the opening of the sinus, which you retain at all times so that it does not come out of its place in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from its place in the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And in this way you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or is approaching adherence, then hold it until it detaches, or for a day. When you detach the敷料，然后更换新的敷料并重新涂抹药膏。
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if from the sinus there is a thin virus spreading, do not wait for its adherence, for the healing of it is approaching, for some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer. In those, the opposite happens.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for nearly days is situated by indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment definiçon, when there is on it an excess of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is curable, is that you take an ointment of definiçon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it to the affected area with an old piece of cloth, and cover it well, and use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And make it appear in that action, when there is no pain, ointment of definiçon, honey when it is cooked and thickened, and use it; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush them all together over the honey when it is on fire, and then lay this over cloth and firmly place it on the sinus; and lay that on the honey which you have cooked and thickened, and sprinkle it with crushed cloth over it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes administer to him long-lasting alkali and root of celestial lily (and the celestial lily), and centaury powder, and use those simples or adjusted ones, sift them, sieve them, and powderize them over honey which I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in the root of it, and investigate whether it affects the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with subsequent sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or foot detached, and becomes firm in other fingers, and since its healing is less desirable, it either develops into a cauterned apostema or corrupts, eroding the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupting that entire area, spreading its corruption to the bone within which it produces an offensive odor, and the tip of the finger is cut off, and the color of the finger becomes pale.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we have said in the division and do not connect your cure, then you must enter to remove all the fluid that has escaped from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cauterization motion is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint have already compressed the flesh to its inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead it, then you must pause a fine cautery at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, placing your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines comburentz corrosives burn internally until it is thoroughly treated; then cure that part with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will be healed that is in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and the corruption spreading to that area, then you must incise it in one of the nodes according to where its memory is pressed, and cure that part until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if at the knuckle upon percussion or rubbing, and indeed in that pain is very strong, then you should at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and soon dry the knuckle with an incision of sharp spathae transversely above in juice, and guard yourself that the section not penetrate into the flesh which is left by the knuckle, for you will thereby cause the patient very strong pain, and it will be a cause of the natural state of excess adjusted flesh in that place; and soon cure that place with what alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But thus adjusted, which is natural in many men, the flesh is very light and soft, or the knuckle is very light.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are located in the region of the joint, or the natural state of the fingers is such that they swell in a few nodules.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is located in some nodules of the finger is not painful, and this which is located in the joints is very painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshly swollen, the section is light, and you should incise it with a sharp knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult is the cure for one born near the joint; therefore beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult is the cure for one born with the knees affected; ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh near the joint into a round cut into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those convenient grooves appropriate for this, and carefully treat what is inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult is the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles either by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation from plague or by burning, or by similarity. Then ensure that you treat this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the bandages oiled linen to prevent them from consolidating too lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are properly consolidated.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then dry out this consolidation as prepared and shape it according to the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of vein inflammations, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vein inflammations are varicose veins, and these are swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the groins, especially in the groins of travelers and workers and those who carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More often, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: apply a compress to the groin with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is feculent from the groin, and strengthen the groin of the patient above the thigh by placing a bandage on the inside below the knee. Then, dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a broad drying technique, and lift the black blood with your hand at the outside of the groin upwards into it, and above it, until the quantity of blood you desire and that is sufficient has drained out, which will tolerate the power of the groin.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then do that, and command him to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are ulcers on it, then place it in hot water and wrap the leg with wet cloth until it turns red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it vigorously if hot water is not available, until the limb is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the vein along its length by fumigation; at the end of the vein, you should lance it, or lower down the vein and cut it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the vein with forceps and incise the vein from all sides until it appears through sensation, and you should notice the blood clotting to a dark color.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then from the incision in the vein, you will see that white which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that cloth elevated and folded from the groin, and suspend it on some hook or ring.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three days, and then strip the groin from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the latter section; you should cut the tendon, and then extract it and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this where you extract it from the section that is further above or above all sections, once everything is extracted; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert that cloth and rotate your hand in all directions where it is folded.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that mass and it has come over the illness through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, whether pressed or unpressed, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having curvature in which there is wrapping at the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then cut over that entirely at all parts of its curvature and at the sites of its wrapping, and place it under pins so that you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so that you do not incise the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult to lift it; and serve your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision at which the vein is severed:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the pin orr:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not made as with ordinary pins, nor of sharp point so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were too thin, it would sever the vein due to its thinness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the crus vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands with tails and as Al-Ategi states in the lands of Arabia, and in the dry and barren lands with little tenacity where no herbs or vines grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the vein is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks down the chain as venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and worms generating between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this is when inflammation occurs violently in the vein at the ankle; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the location of that vesication, seeming like a plant sprouting.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, as the extremity appears, when you wrap a piece of lead around it, which weighs one drachm, and note that and let the lead hang from the ankle.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside until it is outside, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	To cure it, it should be treated more and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the anus, and no cause should be left in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men are situated whose length is as much as ten palms and I have already been told that one was pierced with twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into its tract and perforate that which is long in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings with it many orifices, and is derived from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus cure it as we have said in the division and of what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. It is caused by numerous worms that often affect cattle, and these few worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they move throughout the body up and down, and their movement can be felt from one member to another, breaking through the skin and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, worms, and roundworms are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and affects the brain, then it strongly undermines it and destroys the brain, and this happens frequently.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done if you do not consider its circulation and appearance in relation to the sensation, then make sure that you have what is over it and what is left it by liament and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it is pervading near the heart, then apply strong strictura over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and ensure that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that evacuate putrid and bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section regarding the illness of the kidney.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is passed from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to which I will recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling went up as if a red worm were moving from place to place, though less intensely than one would fear, as if it were living silver moving from spot to spot.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I felt the pain in that area and placed a finger in the muscle, and soon it remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I corrected on the other side of the body near where it affected the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that she should move her body all over; and it was too amazing to see the change in her and the rapidity with which the member affected changed from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my hands according to that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is perceived to be transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have heels as in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was old, with dry organs and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a feeling of that humidity changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delightful and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear as we have said on the heel, then strengthen that area and gently and dryly apply it over that where that constricted humidity has entered, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it on the thick heels, then cure that by releasing the pressure from the body and by what you expel humidity, and purge those with foul pills and with saffron pills and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they lodge; for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave, and dull; some are solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues, and of those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet where they lodge is according to two manners: for the members or are principal seats, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the kidneys, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it lodges in any of these members and shows signs of death to you, which cause I will relate soon, then beware that you avoid extracting that arrow in those where death resides, especially in the major dispositions. And when such evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the brain are when the arrow lodges in it, penetrates the bone, and is situated above the cranium which is over the brain, for it happens by its excessive heat, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly impaired and the voice destroyed. And it is situated at the location of the wound white moisture resembling powder, and of its appearance resembling the humidity of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it has struck in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels a hardness there which is due to shock; and not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black sanguineous wound fluid, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor, and syncope; and from this you know that death descends suddenly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy bleeding from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he expires with a great breath or gasps for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and severe pain along with breathing difficulties, and not all the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, then strongly apply a hand to the wound with some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you press on the arrow in the belly, and it is embedded there, apply a hand to the wound or the tissue or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for its cure by removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder, and it penetrates through with urine flowing out, and the process continues to the parts outside due to some cause, and strong pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, the other members such as the face, the neck, the shoulder, the auxiliary muscles, the spinal columns, the furcula, the thigh, and their counterparts in the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or an artery, and it is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that an arrow struck the eyelid of his eye in the corner of his nose, and I extracted it from one part, left his ear gray, and he recovered, but was not injured in his eye at all.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid but leaving it pierced, and the arrow was already hidden and not completely removed except for a small extremity which adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, fixed in iron without ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is unharmed, and not injured in his eye at all.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was stuck in the groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one had ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his stomach, and I noticed that he died from that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his condition, I incised upon the arrow and removed it, and he recovered, and was not affected by any ill accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound had healed over. And after approximately seven years, incise the arrow at the base of the spine.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman to whom an arrow had pierced her stomach, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any adverse effects from her bodily functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to others.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal subject, who had an arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly moved to the right side a little bit. The entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of the patient around the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the arrow closely; and then I inquired about the one that felt subtle, but could not feel it; yet he felt the puncture and let me touch his right ear, and then suspected that this puncture was at the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the place to be plastered with an attractive and digestive substance, confident that the place we apply it will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries on that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not miss the significant location where the arrow struck; and continue plastering it for several days without missing any spot; and during this time, the wound heals, and the patient feels the arrow inside its sheath for several days until one day I feel the arrow within itself, and then this happens to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And by probing it, I examine that area, and examine the subtle extremity of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time after four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, once the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that opening, and without hesitation, I cease to refine and invent various methods of manipulation. Instead, on one occasion, I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made specifically for such purposes, as described later in this chapter, and I extracted it; then, I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, without any defect in it.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not yet said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not fully understood in the narration nor are they clearly comprehended.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and from what is present to what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not extricated from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is extracted by the place where it entered, or the arrow penetrates into a fleshly location and is then fired and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not respond to the attempt to extract it at the hour in which it was inserted, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it heals and the attraction and its extraction become easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not respond to your attempt, then leave it for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion each day, and it will eventually be extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your sense for several days, then you should know that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at that place of all part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is in the bone of the head and has already acted on one of the brains, and appears in the wound after some of these accidents which you call, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it there until its being equates in several days; or if the arrow reaches the brain, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed only in the bone of the body but does not pass into the brain, and remains in the wound for some days, and you do not incur any of these accidents by any cause, then you should proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is fixed and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and proceed to cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about it by touch, and if you feel it, then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you operate on the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with all the skill that you can; and use ingenuity about this, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those parts that must yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use a twist of your hand with forceps from all sides until it yields; and be subtle at the back with subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and that of that operation.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that at your convenience, then let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him subside, and then repeat that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it causes him contrary symptoms such as fever, then you administer what we have said for treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue in incisions of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the fire on it, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are outwardly discharged contrary to the other part, or which you have already treated in the parts of the outside, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow by the sensation of the part above the wound; then you dry it over that; and let the drying be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then withdraw it, for it is made light by suction.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and gradually extend it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave it for a few days, and then repeatedly apply heat to the area.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft is embedded and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is stubborn, create a concavity with your hand so that between the concavity of the wound and the channel of the arrow, then push it in place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is curved, then push it in forcefully with your hand entering it, as the arrow will straighten by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is nearby such that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it and dry the area, and take care to avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and after cleaning the wound, treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends be shaped like the beak of a bird, so that they grasp the arrow when applied and do not let it slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these, special hooks are made, large, few, and small, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the condition of the wound.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave end of this instrument is like the spoon of a bird to facilitate the removal of the arrow and to push that which is obstructed:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing of deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, in order that the instrument in the concave groove may be relieved and be pressed towards it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed, located in the sixteenth chapter, are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal areas of the eyes, called aspirant; one vein in the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegies at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; — and two veins on the side of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Moreover, the veins that are phlebotomized in the wrists are five; of those, one is cephalic and is from the wild thistle; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a mid-vein, composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They call that one by the people "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic thistle, and they name it "citullar"; the vulgar call that one "the vein of the belly." The veins of the arm, which are placed on the brachial, are those in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears over the elbow by a clear appearance. The saphena, which is the vein between the aforementioned auricular and the small one mentioned, is found in two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is where the curvature of the horn of the wild deer is located; and the second is sophena, and its place is located in the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is located in the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, headaches, meningitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of squeezing those is as I will recount to you: it should be done at the base of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth for good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band in which the two veins appear near the ears on two pressed areas of the head; and you want that at your right side, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right side, here it is to be tested.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical lancet, and that is the one that will be inserted, and then you insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand to the vein and its branches above, and incise the vein with an oblique incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	Let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then press with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries that supply the temple with blood for phlebotomy are ancient and evil migraines, frequent eye strain, and a body full of acute effusions in the feet.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with a cord until two veins appear by palpation, and demonstrate the pulse of their arms; then you can proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts above as you have already indicated, and insert the flebotomi incidentally, and elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the malate, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place there a coté or powder and strengthen that above with a strong construction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the recollection of them has preceded, and after those, the incision, and the extraction at the beginning of the libell.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the youth of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the flebotomy of the cephalic for ancient illnesses of the face and migraines and swelling and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy of the forehead is according to what I will recount to you; it is that the malate strengthens its hole with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossori, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the point which is at the top of the fistula over that vein and strike it either from above or by another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation of the malaise and strengthen it within until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases, the space is opened with a large incision for bloodletting, but I do not know if the bloodletting should be of acute extremity as in other bloodlettings, or beforehand from its lateral extremity, and cut the bloodletting according to the transverse, because the bone is close by and strong; it would break the bloodletting when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More importantly, the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the groove of the eye by inflammation and pus in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is that the malaise strengthens the hole in the skin with a bandage, and then cut the veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the femoral incision should be made transversely along a little length, about as long as a vein where there is no flesh; and if the incision is fine, make its extremity very light.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow until it is as necessary for you, pause over those points, and strengthen them with a bandage for one night, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More so the femoral incision of the vein of the nose is used for acute fever and severe inflammation, for facial diseases, headaches, and redness that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the femoral incision for it is that the patient strains his side and then places his nose in your left hand, and take the fine incision tool and place it in the middle location of the nasal head according to straightness, because the vein does not appear here, and because blood begins to flow quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover your hand with the incision tool little by little and let the blood flow according to your necessity; then remove it after one night, for that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the femoral incision lead to contraction and the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and harmful腐蚀性溃疡, thus like a thorn pierces.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient sweats profusely in his own bed; and the surgeons are above the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a pallet.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And proceed to make the femoral incision along the long vein, gradually making it ample but small; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And proceed to remove the lint and strengthen the two veins with a stricture midwife so that the patient does not overheat, and leave enough room in the wound for the plague to heal.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the youth of the femoral incision for agerich veins, you should observe small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, harmful ulcers, and fissures, as well as harmful ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malais, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then turn back its lips and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and more so is that within the circuit of those veins there are finer, darker ones; then you incise each with an incising cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if doubt remains to you, and you do not know which is which among them, then proceed with the incision of the larger one of them, and the more obvious one among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is customary to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the treatment of the two veins that are in the lower lip for the benefit of the patient is near the femoral incision for preparations that are in the groin, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing a flebotomy is to follow the patient's veins in front of their navel, elevate the vein itself, and observe the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, with the color of each declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform a flebotomy on each; and beware that you do not end your hand in performing a flebotomy on them, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the crotch are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the flebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either place a mirtille or olive needle of fine thickness; or perform a surgical flebotomy with a lancet, and call it an alnessil. This is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is to make a section and of those specific fine cuts according to the size of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of flebotomy with mirtille:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the wound be as you see, and you need to open the concave veins full of apparent large vessels, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way to perform olive bleeding:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this fistula operation is of lesser breadth and of finer extremity, and it pertains to the fistula of fine veins containing subtle citrine pus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the youth of the basilic vein operation, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the pus from the ill areas that affect the knee and the groin, and from what flows from the foot and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it pertains to the fistula operator, when performing that fistula operation, to well guard that and be overly cautious about it, for if he misses and positions the puncture incorrectly in the fistula, he will cut the artery and cause flows of pus, so you must not perform a fistula puncture without first cutting as with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you must leave that and change to the other, or search for one of its branches; or perform the fistula operation at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and incise the fistula with a lancet as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want the femoral flebotomy, then proceed in front of the structure of the thigh where you touch the place and recognize the location of the pulse, then hold it tight; then lift the thigh and drain the vein by making a concave incision as we have said, and be careful that the percussio does not extend too far from the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you press, as you tighten the ligament, inflation occurs in the place you held tight, then that inflation is due to the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the femoral flebotomy as red as a child's, thin blood, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then you tighten and hold your hand for a long space over that; and near to where your hand is, and if the blood stops, or if drops stop, then you lift the thigh and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the thigh away from the moxibustion, and do not wet it for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the bleeding does not stop, and often you must not intervene with present medicine; when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is constricted, and the blood is stopped; or that you take some passed through a fist, and perform that, and take one half and strengthen it over the place of the vein with strictura descending on linen and powder between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	But if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; and if not, then cure it with that of which it is preceded in the memory of the place of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the bleeding from it is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm swelling.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial in extracting the blood from the part that will ascend to the head and from the part that descends in the body; because this is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the incision for the phlebotomy which is over-tensioned in his phlebotomy, for that is a nerve; then if it adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, it will happen to him a stupor, and the recovery is difficult for him, and rarely he is completely cured. This nerve moves several times in sensation; and if it is hidden at some men and is subtle and not shown, then cover the phlebotomy which you do with section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw the blood from the head and relieve the ailments of the heels.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And cover this properly, if you want to do the phlebotomy with an olive or myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the pure blood from all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, however, you should perform the femoral incision keeping in mind that when performing the incision do not puncture the head of the vein solely, and search for the location slightly lower, and do not mark it, unless it is subjected to the first percussion which is over that area several times during the incision.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, however, abscesses are found in some individuals when the femoral incision is not performed during the first percussion, but do not mark it again for that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the femoral incision and the accidents related to it are matters that you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that the femoral incision is administered only for the conservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the occurrence of diseases, and that the femoral incision be made in one of the veins that are in the groin: cephalic, external jugular, and internal jugular; and that the femoral incision be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a femoral incision and let at least three hours pass after the first part of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more frequent the femoral incision is administered, the more it becomes necessary and convenient at that time, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And ensure that a boy not be circumcised until he is fourteen years old, and a girl who is pregnant should not be circumcised unless it is in the fourth month of pregnancy, and old women should not be circumcised if they have passed fifty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when anyone wishes to be circumcised by any means, ensure that they modify their intestines before the circumcision by applying a lion's gall (clister), if there is any retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not carry the superfluous material during the circumcision of the intestines, which are purified, and do not affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not circumcise patients who are nauseous, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or drunkenness until these conditions have passed, nor for dropsy. More frequently, circumcision should be performed near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal condition, near increased sexual activity and labor and exercise, and near fasting or vigils, and for all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporeally or spiritually.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the sore is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible to him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by some exercise so that the sore be subtlety treated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the phlebotomy on the foot, so when it is around the hour of tertian, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the foot of that patient should be guarded on that day from all evil accidents, as when it is angustia, ira, temor, and from all bodily accidents, as when it is toil and superfluous pain, or coyt and things similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her service, have ready the causes in the use of which custom has it should be aromatic and odorous, and balms similar to those according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the lancet two or three times; and bind it tightly with a strap and wrap that area twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tempered, that is, when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flux of the blood; or it is for mollification, and then prohibit the flow of the blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the stricture is near, have those who are to perform the lancing rub their hands together between them where the veins are swollen, and make it clear by touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the lancer anoints his lancet with a little anti-inflammatory oil properly; and places his index finger on the vein with his left hand, positioning the location for the lancing so that the vein slightly protrudes, making it palpable. For this is where you find the vein similar to a fleeing cord, indicating fullness of venosity. When the lancing is paused over this area, the vein contracts and the lancer reveals the puncture site; if the lancing does not work on the vein, and it does, then the vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, so that the phlebotomist be firm and solicitous in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then place the phlebotomist, but if the vein is not fully opened in one pass, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this or another pass, leaving that area a little, or over it apply more pressure, if the area is not suppurated.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is suppurated, or the patient spasms, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the ligament, for it would force an abscess to burst or not enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the pus is subtle, and you fear that it will not drain the quantity you want, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to correctness and adjust slightly for the appearance. Do so with more pressure before the area suppurates, as the area will suppurate less if you maintain a small opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already gangrened, then do not operate on it, for it is not worth any reason; instead place your hand over some part of the opening, for it relieves the body from the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the opening of oil in all fistulotomies where they incise the veins; they should prohibit the flow of blood from the body, and do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood becomes finer and is agitated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large gangrene is generated in the fistulotomy site, where many boils occur, especially to those who have not been previously lanced but only that one time, or during the appearance of the small vein, then lance it and place a sponge infused in water and salt over the area, slightly heated for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And ensure that this is done near the bleeding from that vein with the aid of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if any darkness or greenness appears in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mandrake juice or calamine or similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when blisters and boils occur, you should perform incision on the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If at that time you find it soft, apply a compress to that area, as such an elevation is bad and harmful; then be careful to place some cause of what we have said there, for strong fluid will flow from the arteries.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster for styptics, so that the area may be hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And ensure that you extract from the wound all the pus according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you let it remain until it is discharged; similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is acute, you wait until its sharpness subsides.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when there is a swelling that is hard and requires the extraction of pus in one go, enlarge the incision in the vein and make the incision long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when it is soft, do the opposite, and make the incision in such a way that the pus is extracted in multiple stages, and that it be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venous incision is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of incision saves from the flow of pus and the cutting of nerves, and is both safe and safer than venous incision according to its width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which syncopal attacks are accustomed to occur with incision, make the incision such that you treat it before the incision with a drop of wine infused in milgrana or simple oxymel; and extract from the edge of the pus in three stages or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a numbness of the complexion, then apply before the incision a liniment in resin of myrrh or resin of aromatic honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant resin.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you happen to have a syncopal episode, perform a flebotomy, as this is caused by the excess of black bile; then have him drink water from meat and strain a subtle fragrant essence; use aromaticity like sage, and apply it to his foot.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncopes due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you wish to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, do this from which the flebotomy is primarily an evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if you wish to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if you wish to draw the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it flows, do this on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that body in which there is a wound is scraped and inflamed and causes fever, ensure that the blood is evacuated from it all at once and in large quantity, and amplify the perception so that syncope does not occur before the evacuation; and since you have preserved all the conditions of venesection, place your hand on the pulse to control the body's blood, so that it does not lead to death instead of syncope, for several times such things happen when the venesection is performed by ignorant and negligent practitioners.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with force and slightly extend it, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until the venesection is performed again; or remain with the perception of the effect of the venesection that has coagulated the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand over the area of tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and keep it with a light compression until the blood settles.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the wound subsequently, and there is no excuse, then you apply it to that location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised in place of the cubital or basilic, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of incising that vein is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water while the incision becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tightly bind it with linen cloth at the midpoint; and then incise according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be broad, and let your incision be small where you incise that vein near the wrist of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you are forbidden the flow of blood, then you repeatedly dip your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly dipping your hand in the trailing water, and instead preserve the flow of blood in the trailing water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of thesavatella of the right hand is related to the ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you press the hand with flax or with your hand, rather than leave it in the trailing water until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; then immediately perform the incision transversely; and if you incise it completely, no harm will ensue.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And conserve that you do not place your hand at the fistula, for leave it so the nerves of the fingers are naked of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in the water basin and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in the water basin, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover, the youth of the fistula from the one on your left hand is that it is related to the ailments of the side.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the fistula on the other side as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the renal vein from the fistula is related to the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as kidney diseases, and retention of menses, and ailments of groins and ancient wounds, and their similar symptoms of ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his foot in hot water and makes friction on that area where the veins appear; then over the joint of the foot he ties a bandage; and at the location of the vein you cut it apparent and from there its branches spread out on the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore perform the femoral incision wide open or tie the bandage where you cut the artery, which is better and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the femoral incision on the face of the foot, then you must protect the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and place your incision over the area where you make the cut transversely, as if you were going to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the emission of blood is forbidden; then you immerse the foot in hot water and let the blood flow in that area where it should be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the femoral incision is made incorrectly in the first attempt, then redo the femoral incision a little, for the location is salt; and do not fear its malignity, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And make the incision on the other foot in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said previously, you should make the incision at the point where the artery divides.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the outcome of the femoral incision is pain in the hip when it is due to severe injury or infection.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient enters bath, and tightens and strengthens his thigh with a thin long bandage under the knee four fingers above the incision, for it does not show otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform the femoral incision as each method is at your disposal and according to the transversal cut, which is better; or insert there through an incision or extract it through extraction, for the location is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often in the big toe; and if you find it and it does not appear by touch, then incise some branch of it, and that is which appears on the side of the foot opposite the auricular and annular toes.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the quantity of blood flow that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the constriction and place your hand over the incision site to strengthen it, so that it heals slightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	For ventilation and of the qualities to use with those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is performed according to two methods: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without incision is performed according to two methods, which either use fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And at the vents that are administered by scarification and extraction of scabs, there are four locations of the body, of which one where the vents are paused is at the nostrils, and is the very last part of the head; and the next best location of the two parts of the neck together; and vents of the chin leave the jaw behind and then from the mouth; and vents of the nasal passages; and vents of the throat, and it is on the end of the larynx; and vents of the ears, and are about the size of two brasses; and vents of the two spines; and vents of the loins, and are on the side of the back; and vents of the two thighs; and vents of the two hips.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And vents are not used to extract the scab but rather on the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this no virtue is lost through those, thus as it is a remedy by phlebotomy; nor should vents be made with fire or several fires in any illness caused by congestion where the body is fully evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes the use of vents for an illness or during its continuance, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in some men, blood is increased between digestion and evacuation of the stomach by ventilation and they find gravity and hardness in their head; and among them there are those who find fullness and inflammation on their face and head, and on their neck; and among them there are those who find pain on their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those who feel the place of ventilation; and among them is that their laughter is increased; and among them is that they find taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and they spit blood; and among them is that their sleep is increased, and among them who see blood in their sleep inflammation, spots, and other causes similar to theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when times occur for any of those causes, and precisely if it is in the third or fourth part of the month, then they command ventilation to be made rather than after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the reason for ventilating the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and what is embedded in the eyes; more correct is that this be close to the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this flask is at the location of craniotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that which is filled with pus or in which there is a catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, I do not recommend using those of the elderly, in which there are gouty ailments.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But rather for those who have continued over it, an oblivion is caused; and for this reason, you should command the applier to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the edges of the area treated, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But the ventosa of alkahel is at the location of the craniotomy of the vein fusca and basilica: and for this reason, it helps in asthma, and in the constriction of air and in the rupture of the windpipe, and in coughing, and in repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is recommended to slightly warm the alkahel ventosa, for if it is left cold at the site, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the inhalation of almond confers on headaches and ocular pain, migraines, prefocacio, and toothaches; it is in place of basilica phlebotomy.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And ensure that the inhaler does not press his hand on the scarification so as not to cut the artery and disturb the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And with inhalation, let the menthol confer relief for alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gingiva, and a semblance to those illnesses that are in the mouth and are located near the alveolar bone. It is in place of phlebotomy of the alvine vein that is in the upper and lower lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the inhalation that is made over two spoons confers cathartic effects, which is done by restoring temperature.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the inhalation of the two divided parts inside the flasks confers rejuvenizing effects similar to phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic. For that extracts the blood from all those veins, especially the smaller ones in the flesh, and those finer veins between the larger ones where the extraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the fan to blow not upon the incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a fan with which air is blown and you apply it to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers, but leave them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And ensure that you command the fan to be a large one, made of silk, for the area requires strong dryness; and use strong light thin fans in incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More fans from the legs decrease manifestly, for they carry the scum from the whole body, and relieve ancient pains in the kidneys and the uterus, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve both pain and distension; and are in place of the flebotomy of two sophenas, and hanged, and of two ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they also inflame the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the fans, those for hanging are closely related to the fans for two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the vents is to place the vent at the beginning wide and squeeze by tempered suction, and do not prolong the position of the vents, but pause them slightly, leave them constantly, and let the humors come to the area by equal occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until the area is already reddening and swelling, and the redness of the sore appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and repeat the suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If the person has tender flesh due to dampness, ensure that you incise only once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventillator to widen the incision slightly, and facilitate the suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the sore is swollen, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for subtilization to the sore and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Moreover in the second for the careful examination of the removal of the large bowels.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the bowels are foul-smelling, then let scarification be performed on the fourth day so that it may heal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the bowels little by little or only a small amount, suffice us one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want the extraction of foul-smelling bowels, perform a major scarification; and if we know that the bowels are large, then we must perform a broad scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one from which the incision is large, hard, dark, and its pores are wide, then the areas for the cups should be anointed gradually, openly resolving; if it is in summer, then use oil of aloes or oil of violet or oil of balm or oil of frankincense; and if it is in winter, then use oil of narcissus or oil of marigold or oil of chamomile or of bowels, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of saffron, or balsam oil, or aloes wood oil, or nutmeg oil, and similar to them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the fan is of broad pores with tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places near the pores of the fan, apply water washed or cold water, or water of solanum, or water of cowage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that of which the wound is due to damp moisture, wash its pores with wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that of which the excesses are large, wash its pores with old wine, or water of santisc (which is marjoram), or decoction of nutmeg, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be kept before bathing; having it should be administered immediately after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the fan.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done that the wind-disposing and blood-letting occur before the releasing of winds.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When you consider the beginning: when the wind-drawer or the one who is to be blood-let is choleric and windy with a sharp pain and inflammation, then you should take causes that cool down, such as sour milken glands, endive in vinegar, and laxatives, julips, and their like.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as beans, chicken livers, and fatty meats, and foods seasoned with acids, and similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for him whose complexion is phlegmatic, you should give him to drink essarop of almond milk, or essarop of asecanabin of seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with honey and vinegar; and it should be ordered that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like beans, canabis, pissers (a type of herb), and petiz (a type of chicken).
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And you should ensure that on the day of wind-drawing and blood-letting, his drinking is greater than his eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to be drunk in some hours to some men strychnine alkaloid, or musk medicines, so as musk or acelita before ventilation or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the fever subside; and it should not be taken by those who are scalded.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the ventilation that is for his scarring be ventilation placed on the liver, and over gout and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the side, since these members do not suffer scarring upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those [scars] but for the fever of the member, thus as we place a cupping on the breast in illness of flux of fever from the blood of the nose; and we use this to dissolve the local fatness of the member, thus as we place it on the belly and the navel; for that rarifies the member and heats it and reduces the pain which resolves the fatness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is cupped over the flanks when there are accidents in their operation or stone, for by virtue of its strong suction, the cupping relieves the pain and expels the stone from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when it is placed on the liver and spleen, one should notice distension in those enclosed areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These distensions are treated with suction in some applications; and sometimes with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And in some applications, they are administered full of clear water for the ailments of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is to ensure the distension is filled and becomes larger, it should be clear water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the distension applied with heat: let the diameter of the orifices be two fingers, according to how we have formed them; and the quantity of the decoction be half a palm; and it should be in the length thereof, in the place that is in the circuit, the size thereof, I take it small according to the quantity that enters into it one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of wormwood or citrus, large leaves, hyssop, equal and thin so that it does not lead the member to deviate from its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place a candle on the middle of the patient's thigh or leg where it is cauterized by the flame.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large basin is greater than the one we have used; and the small amount of water according to the ailments and the condition of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those who are fatigued are different from those used for young people and pregnant women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of cauterizing this suction cup with fire on the member is to extend the material over the fire of decent wood before a small wax candle, and place that over the middle of the thigh transversely in the middle location of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the area where it is placed without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the patient's member, and the same place as we have said is used. When we have the suction cups and do not need to hold the described place and do not let it come out or burn with vapor over that thread, then the suction cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the poultice according to its manner, and repeat it if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of ventosa (cupping) used for the illness of pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the part only as needed.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of the cup: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in major members but in the members where the position of cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the tongue and similar parts; or on a member naked of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be sanguissuguas in the boiled and purified waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And after they are laid down in warm water until they become relaxed, and no cause of swelling remains in their belly; then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and fomentations; then rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; then place them over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, apply fomentation to the area with fomenting herbs, which is more effective in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and apply cold water; then rub and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the blood is prolonged to the site of the vessels, and where it tends to accumulate, then insert a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area until the accumulation subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol trisulphate or powders similar to it in nature from stanching causes over it, until the bleeding is stopped; or place compresses of boiled fava beans on the area, and leave them until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And dig, if necessary, repeated bleeding, when possible change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bleeding is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent blood has gathered or insert a needle into the areas where it is still oozing; and subsequently pause, waiting until the blood flow lessens.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to subside, powder the area with a little bitter almond, or salt, or ashes, and apply it soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus start the procedures of the fourth part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that this chapter is known by the medical texts, the vulgar ones, and those who have not studied the free works of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during all that time; and I have not adopted what I have learned here, but only through a long period of reading the free works of the Ancients and studying them with understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct my experiments and studies in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that concerns my science and about which I have conducted my experiments; now I shall abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from the occupation of lengthening. And I shall abbreviate this in the end of abbreviation; and I have shown this in the end of declaration; and I have formed these notes with forms of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Sum up and collect the main points regarding fractures of bones, from those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recall of various parts of bone injuries.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Begin by summarizing the main points of this discourse at the prologue of this chapter; and those chapters that must be understood by the artisan at the beginning, you shall stand firm on the truth of those. It is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when accidents occur to any fracture or dislocation or twist or settlement, when you must touch at the beginning for ligation or remove it, or both together, if no cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or it is one on which an accident occurs, or very in decrepitude, or is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore it is content in food consisting of herbs fresh and of flesh of pheasant and of crab; and we prohibit fatty meats and fullness from foods and from all food that fills the veins with sanguine, until you are safe from abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And therefore return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of the time.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you must feed the patient with nutritious foods rich in both liquid and solid substances, and viscous ones, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and other similar foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is induced slightly and honey is applied.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones crack in those men who are in the prime of life and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuous and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs, and those that are of them in the end of youth are likewise like the bones of young animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Moreover, however, nature adjusts and amends over the broken bone from any part due to a cause resembling glue in which it thickens and adheres strongly to that, congealing them together, bringing forth the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, and in no way prohibiting that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrain the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fracture according to the different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull骨；而脚骨的骨折不同于腿骨的骨折；同样，所有其他部位的骨折彼此之间也各不相同。
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will recount all species of fracture, expanded in their separate chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great diversity of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in themselves; for there is an arcuate fracture and another that occurs at the nodes; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the suture, nodes, and additions both present and absent, thus as when a pen is prepared to write, there is a fracture by cutting and disruption in the head, and a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species there is a specific or torment in restoration, as will be recounted separately in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this it is known that a bone is fractured: there is curvature of it, and an elevation and prominence of it in sensation, and its pain when you press upon it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is neither apparent curvature nor pain, you should make your touch active when you touch the bone; if the patient does not experience great pain, then this is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is curvature or a small fracture, so you should feel it with your hand and by compression of the whole; then place your hand over it for a while, on which you apply some medicines from which you recall a significant effect at that place; and gradually it will straighten due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And feel that the place when it is curved but not split into two or more parts as does not happen in rupture, such that the whole part of its composition is softened; then you should begin to correct it gradually, having an abscess form on it with a pointed cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs at that place, then let it be for some days until the abscess ceases; and then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and piercing of it is lighter than the place where you are operating.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the memory of it that will come.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you have found it, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position such that you equalize the member's location according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then you must force yourself to return those additions with skill and according to any manner you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that it does not happen to the patient due to your operation causing pain or injury; and force yourself according to your own power to place one bone with its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that profitable hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations by these means, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen through their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, achieve equilibrium and a proper operation of that member, and maintain rest and tranquility; advise the patient on this and make sure they avoid aggravating it during their waking hours and while sleeping, observing its reaction and agitation, and directing its evacuation and all its movements by your full virtue; wait until the position of the member is in a position where pain is assuredly relieved, which occurs when the pain or injury is in the disposition of that position. When you notice that it no longer feels pain in another disposition, ensure that this new position is straight and equal, so that when the member is restored, it does not incur any distortion.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the injury of the affected member is such that I describe; so that you may know that the members you break are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, see that the wrapping is of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there is a wrapping hard and tight, for the tight binding connects the large and strong member from all sides during injury, ensuring that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after your first dressing, loosely apply three or four wrappings according to the part affected; and firmly hold your hand around each wrapping.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and firmly ensure that your wrapping is as tight as you have made the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually extend the covering of the fracture area a little, and gently relax the tension little by little, during which time you should take from the area a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the injured area over the covering, and gradually bring the coverings to the part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the tension of the covering and in the relaxation of that according to what we have said in the first covering above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stopa or cloth bandage where the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize on these coverings, making them decently tight as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in the area; otherwise, pause over what is the abscess there and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the coverings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stays of the patient's side be broad and well-formed; or made of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stay conform to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is thicker and a bit wider than the other bandages, and the length of the splint according to the size and magnitude as read on the member; and place another bandage firmly around the splint according to our first fixation; and apply it properly with a good plaster as we said regarding the fixation, and ensure that your fixation is stronger at the location of the fracture, and the more it is extended from the fracture, the weaker the fixation.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and subtlety, and use linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used their fingers to place thick cords of thread, it is a great error when applying the fixation with equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And similarly, thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the fixation with those that you want, and it is not necessary that there be less than one finger's width between splints.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the location, then place those of stopped wool or crimsoned wool between them so that it does not harm the area.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are cracks, and accidents of disruption in the chain, and I will recall that in the Capitol according to their singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for all broken members, they are not set by vessels on the first day; this cause is because the member, when large, cannot bear pressure from vessels but after about 3 to 7 days or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied over fractures and dislocations.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the reduction and restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from powder of mill, i.e., the marrow that comes from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you should keep it thus, but sieve that white powder of almonds, and place the preparation not too thick nor too thin; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to plaster for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, onion, and myrrh, which are scraped from the root of salvamar (a type of wild mignonette), all of them a drachm each; myrrh and aloes, five drachms each; alcohol, twenty drachms. Scrape all of them, sieve them, and mix them with alcoholic water or with white powder of almonds if the wound is deep. Then use this plaster, which is of good composition, to restore lightly broken bones and cover it well.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to make a plaster that helps with fractures and sprains: take myrrh and one part of white alfalfa, each a drachm; myrrh and aloes, five drachms each; acacia, six drachms; and Armenian wax, twenty drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them should be ground in a mortar with much water, sieved, and prepared with water or white powder of almonds, and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this poultice there is no virtue of restoration, of abscess cautery and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of poultice that restores blocked passages: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; combine them all and make a poultice of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A brief way of poultice to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: mix roots of algae, chamomile, and flowers of violets, with wheat flour, all in equal parts; sift them together and soak them in vinegar, if the limb is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is scalded, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger way of poultice for resolution that is better than the first, when you encounter a hard abscess and need to restore the limb: mix roots of algae, seeds of flax, safflower, clover, marigold, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and equally; all should be sifted and soaked in water of lime, or water boiled twice, or in vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the limb immersed you must restore it rather a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia be seen that it should be placed over the limb broken you must restore it and the causes in which desiccation of low temperature such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of crushed celandine, bark of a cut-down man, oryx horn, and althea, and salt; mix them, sift them, wrap them up, and make into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which you should let the wound soak and then properly disjoint it be that you consider whether pain nor pruritus has occurred nor is the bone broken, then do not disjoin from several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain vehemently or itching or inflammation occurs in the area, then you should cauterize or disjoint it at once, and apply the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sponge of seawater, and immerse that in clear water, and with that wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterwards cover it with well-soaked wool submerged in wine and oil or rubbed oil, and wrap it overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and let the inflammation of the member subside, and relieve the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that fine stricture and patch only lightly with your first constriction, and keep it subtle until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already relieved, and there is no need for a patch or stricture, then apply it as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause affecting the member occurs among those we have mentioned, then do not remove it but leave it for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to how you judge by the healing of the member, as we said, until the fracture adheres and rests on the coagulation of the flesh there.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the tighter fit more than in your first fit, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's belly, according to whether the recollection of it precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see the place of the fracture already dry and shriveled more than concave, then perceive that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that area entirely with fresh water for a full day; and let this be done over three days; and ease the tension a little, and by this operation supply the member with nutrition, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And what the fracture restorers do another time when it is not restored to the beginning, according to whether it is concave and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear; if this were right as they enlarged the Ancients in their books and advised on this matter.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter on Fractures: When an injury occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are spots, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fracture is made by spaza impact, and the impact obstructs all the bone within the socket, which leaves the bone thus as in the wood, and by this this species is named ascial; or spaza incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh but does not pass the incision into the marrow thereof; and this species of fracture is named levatio absolute.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contricious or abrasive; its cause is impact from a fall or building on stone, and they resemble each other.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating and already approaches the periosteum which leaves the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture, it is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair [cancellous bone], and by this it is named this species of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this is a fracture that is caused by compression or impact, resembling such that some layer of the bone enters the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location as when you strike a metal plate and its entry into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is most commonly found in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of comminuted fractures, they are bad as if separated by stakes.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will apply a warm remembrance to its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these types of fracture through detection at those sites and through inquiry about their pain and the appearance of the torn flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known because it is discovered on the bone, is abraded, and limits around it with pain, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's symptoms, and if you observe through these symptoms what they signify manifestly by signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the extremities, and redness of those areas, and resemblance to these symptoms in the major positions, then you should doubt that it is not healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter accidents not commonly seen, then hope for recovery, as you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the cause is that if the patient comes to you in the beginning of the attack as injured and this occurs during the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bowels of the bone on the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then consider that you have cuts exposing the bone on the seventh day, having that what has been left on the bone is corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces and is rough, then consider that you must incise the fractured part and smooth it out, according to what I have recounted to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And when you incise the head of the injured thigh, uncover over the bone according to custom and your method as is possible according to the shape of the injury, and let it be shallow over the thigh.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must detect the bone, flux of blood or abscess cautery, then you press against it with what fits, and you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is sedated, and you are sure of the flux of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight down, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more the incisor more lateral than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And make sure that you have the number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the rear of their extremities in acuity, and be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their assistance in percussion over the incisions to prevent them from contracting and leading it there.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, first drill in the circuit around it before you make incisions with the probes, which you call shallow probes.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are thus called so because they do not reach the end of the bone's length, but rather to what is close to it. Therefore, the probe has a round extremity or edge resembling a small margin or circle, which you prohibit from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you use a large number of probes, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. While the head of each probe should be sharp at its extremity, the length and shortness in quantity should correspond to the thickness of that particular bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of probes: The quality of drilling around the broken bone is to place the probe on the bone and rotate it with the needles called such that you know the bone has been penetrated; then move the probe to another location, and ensure that what is left behind takes the quantity of the size of the ray or surrounds it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the scalpel where it is between each tendon of the bone, and make that small opening subtle which you can do at the end of levitation, as we have said, while excavating the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as forceps and subtle scissors.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And see that you be careful that the scalpel does not touch any part of the joint.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, after you have circled the bone and perforated it, and if it is to be separated from the joint, continue with it, and extract that part. See that you rasp and smooth it out to match the roughness of the bone with another instrument resembling a scalpel, but see that it be finer and more subtle than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small part of the bones is broken and fragmented, then take that with ease using one of the instruments; then cure the wound with lint and ointments, which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which he named Gualia and left by great laud; this is its saying: at the beginning it is necessary for you to start uncovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most intense and most evident, when you have uncovered that part and placed your hand gently but happily on the extremity of this incisive instrument of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lens-shaped part is round and does not incise for any reason, while the acute part divides into two lengths forward, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part is adjusted to the chisel along the face of the acute part incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisive part with a small hammer as you incise the entire bone with ease, and you be certain of the panniculus that it does not occur in the accident you fear in any way, and if the medicant was the most fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When some cause within the bone of the patella in certain places of the bone, it will incise that part at the extremity of the incised lenticular one, and deliver that part with ease, for it is relieved of its harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the patella, and what is absceded or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains in that roughness and subtle layers, then you must rasp that roughness and eradicate those layers with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer of them the most convenient parts for each location according to where you are conducting your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer with your judgment by which you rasp the bone at the beginning using the broad edge of those razors, and then use more of their subtle part, and do not cease to do this continuously until you reach administering the coarse part and the subtle part of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small fractures or subtle fractures, you must administer care according to where you are leading towards correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not eased on all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place ourselves above what we have written about in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is cut when you excise the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in olive oil, and place it over the wound opening; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth and submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one; do this lightly enough that you do not weigh down the dressing. And administer ointment on top, but do not press it so strongly as to weigh down the dressing.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and administer medicines that have excessive dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and of myrtle, and similar.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make of these medicines a powder that is sprinkled over the wound, such as being dry; generally, administer to it all medicine of the property of which cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard thy virtue that the wound in thy cure be clean; and not surdicious of ointment or other; nor layst thou to add virulence therein; for when adjusted upon the linen of the brain, corrupt that and spoil it, and incur about the malady nearby this malignity.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And thou incurrest in the sinciput of the head, as from it is modified the bone and especially when the cure thereof is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface thereof; and therefore consider when thou incurrest in the malady the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious to him altogether.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackness arises but from the medicine that is applied above, and is by virtue of that medicine that it causes that blackness, then take part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the sinciput; and cure it with the spices of cure that are suitable until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third chapter.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken but split into two parts, or one of those few cracks, because in the nose there are two bones; the part you see is cartilaginous and is not broken, so do not damage it but rub, soothe, and apply gentle pressure.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the little finger into the nostril and equalize the fracture inside according to your diagnosis, and externally, so that the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you with ease, and guard yourself that the pain does not worsen due to your operation on the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the cartilaginous part of the nose, and your finger does not reach there, then you must equalize it at the end of the bone where there is a slight swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply you to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, shortly after the seventh or half day, provide it with the rest of the apothecary.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them expand fully to fill the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in honey, and changed throughout the day, but this is not seen by me; instead, use a piece of linen cloth soaked in honeycombed powder. And allow the cloth to remain until the bone is set, and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a cloth, pure honey wrapped in linen cloth; and when the nasal fracture is severe enough that breathing is not forbidden.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, plug the nose with a cork or woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil, or with a diaphoretic.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if no abscess occurs, when it is necessary to plug it from the outside with sesame seed flour and pine gall powder in honey; then place your hand on the patient's forehead, and do not plug the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the nose bones are broken with a small fracture or are reduced, when it is necessary to split those bones, and extract them with instruments suitable for those; then at the site of the incision, treat that with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters as appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a boil occurs inside the nose, when it is necessary to treat that with washes and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, examine whether the fracture is only superficial and not broken into two parts and bent inwardly, in which case its prognosis is mild.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the left hand index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the said index finger from the right hand; and push the yellowish matter of the fracture inwardly with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly as much as necessary.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the right alignment so that the healing of them is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter loosening of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect to lose on the edge of gold or silver or copper; and place a cautery over the broken jaw, and place it over the doubled cloth, and place it over the large star-shaped stake decently made, or one piece equal in length to the jaw; and place that above as appropriate for your ligature and the application, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and pause his meals for lion's share.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then on the seventh day you should apply it; and then correct what has already been altered in it and plaster it with powder of moly, or with ash of hyssop, or with flour of cumin, provided that you have scraped off the cerot of it, and place woolen cloth over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when this plaster is applied and adjusted to it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is strong and healed. For major fractures heal in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is displaced, then consider whether it is a serious separation or displacement. Then you should carefully examine these displacements and treat them as required for their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds' openings are wide, then enlarge them according to the quantity of your necessity by means of bloodletting.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And soon after you have completed those stages, and from there it will no longer be necessary to do so, then enlarge the wounds' openings if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the dressings that you prepare over it and cover it with flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the sternum is fractured, in the middle part you must break the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is fractured, separated, or separated into two parts without going through stages, the restoration is easier; when such stages occur in it, the restoration is difficult; or when the fracture is through the wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is through the wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and follows the broken sternum, and the other extends the neck at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then equalize the fracture by applying pressure where it is made according to its shape, and do not let it be in a prominence or depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's limb on a pillow or cloth, let it be the size according to your necessity; extend and elevate the femur and compress the pillow with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the femur outward because it is stuck in the pelvis, when you can have the patient lie on their side on a pillow, place a cushion halfway down the length of the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the surgeon presses on the muscle at the sides until the femur is elevated to its place in the pelvis, and then you realign the fracture and equalize it with the bones mentioned.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel the roots of the femur and they are soft, when you can cut there and remove those roots with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this, after placing your hand on the furcula to hold the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a spoon, of which this is its concavity; and its width depends on what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; it has two extremities thus like you see, and one extremity is broad while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound you have incised when you have extracted the fragment of the bone is large, and you are sure there is an abscess forming, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess forming, then you manage the wound with cloths and powders according to the extent of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then fill a cloth with vinegar and olive oil, heat it, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is broken and the area is swollen and dry, then you should place a plaster made of flour mixed with honey, apply it to the lion's stop (a specific application site), and then place a sponge soaked in it. If more is needed, then take a long strip of Saracen cloth, about one palm width, and place powder twice its thickness over the plaster and the sponge; then take a thin table stick, three fingers wide and similarly long; wrap this stick in cloth, and wrap the cloth with the stick over the fracture area; repeatedly apply heat to it, rotate the bandage around the neck of the wound, leaving some on the good side and more on the bad side, and secure the entire part. This is what you should do until the swelling of the fracture decreases, which is when this method will be effective for you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always ensure that the stick is not placed over the broken bone; so that you can see the wound every day, when the bandage becomes moist or you notice the stick has dried out, then you adjust this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and place some padding under their neck so that when they lie down at night, a small cushion supports them; thus raising the assistant under them, and therefore the elevation of the fracture of the furcula is raised to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm attached to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an occurrence at the site previously or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see any change in its appearance, and adjust it to fit properly and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the need in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken at the lateral side of the fracture and not from it, but along the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner which is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powder of ground album of wheat and stoped lion on the area; and then place powdered duplicate cloth; and then place a thin slice of table wax according to the quantity of the spoonful, or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if you leave the wax slice concave in some part of the spoonful, then level that concavity with stoped lion, and then place the wax slice according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen on top with a well-constructed bandage and firmly place the wax inside so that it does not shift from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage on each day; and every time it becomes softened, reapply another one and strengthen and equalize the wax if it shifts from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and know for sure that it belongs to the bones whose initial breaking was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the ligament and tie it, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of satucket, if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends move and heal and become united.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middledecline towards the internal parts and cause great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and fever; they are manifested in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is to have the patient lying on their back, place a cushion between their shoulders; then press on the muscles, adjust the spine against the ribs, and perform the operation with subtlety according to every possible and convenient manner until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place the plaster and padding over it, and cover with a thin layer of wax or of tallow and similar in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; then perform the application gently on the broken bone so it is not bruised; and bind it tightly but decently several times along the back, strengthening that binding. And consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes a suppuration or pus, or pain, or abscess to occur in that area, then you incise and drain it, and eradicate the plaster, and rectify what has occurred by the method of curing; then reduce the amount of plaster, if you see fit, and adjust the binding while it is healing.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join together; and at their ends in front, such contact does not occur since they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the perception of it is not hidden from the senses through the examination of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with splints, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the internal parts, then it causes severe and puncturing pain in the patient, similar to the pain that occurs when an abscess has matured. For this reason, you place a dressing on the bone; and it results in difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to spasms; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters dealing with them.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them they say: Place the patient in a position where food generates inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outward parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle accidentally; and if an accident does occur, then help is already at hand.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it should be placed above the abdomen and close to where it might flow with strength; and this seems reasonable, but nonetheless it is feared that the abdomen might carry the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: Place the area covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and let it be sprinkled with powders between the ribs until it is filled, which should be wrapped tightly like when you wrap something according to its roundness; and then treat the patient with a pleurosis of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is greatly constrained causing him not to suffer, and you puncture the skin with a needle to release it, be careful about the patient, then cut over the place, uncovering from the broken rib, and place ourselves over that instrument which we remember from before, and incise the skin easily, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and cure that with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powder in rosin oil, place over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be applied on the lint over which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fracture of the vertebrae of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes when there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and then apply friction and similar to the vertebrae of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider whether their pulse is already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot rise, extend, nor strengthen those pulses, and when you constrain them at the wrist or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in those places, then know that they are not well. In such cases of symptoms, death is likely.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in those places when you constrain them at the wrist or prick them with a needle, then know that the tip of the bone is saved and that the gout will heal through treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you feel along the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will recover or not, then consider the pulses in their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you find that they are already softened, feel along those areas where pain is felt in the pulses, and when pressing on their wrists, give them air and induce vomiting at their will, and sometimes lift them onto their sides and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and then do not attempt treatment for them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for this is to perforate to relieve the abscess by cauterizing where you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or with pieces of cloth applied; place this over that area for several days until the abscess is relieved.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and apply oil over that area; command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the friction of the bone socket or any separated cause touches it, then you must cauterize the vein and hold the bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后用一些肉色的药膏治疗那里，直到痊愈。
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the end of the femur, then you must insert your left hand's thumb into the buttock, and realign the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible by second-order reduction; then apply a plaster and bandage, if needed, and support that area.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken stages in it, then operate on that, stop it, and treat the wound with a cure that is prepared before it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the thigh.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and are split in length and decline to the inner parts; and accidents such as pain occur in the area and puncture, and the leg is numbed when it fractures.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area while it is near the fracture, which has the shape of the bone.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the bone, then you align that part according to how it appears to you by equilibrium, aligning it so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or already declines to the inner parts, then you set the leg on its belly while preparing the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod over that, and strongly bind it, about which fear neither puncture nor removal of the rod.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the cavity by placing what fills it within which that receives the binding according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Then place something that sedates it according to what has been described; then return to its restoration and strongly bind it as appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there arises in the bone suppuration or is comminuted, then treat it accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The humerus is that which is between the elbow to the shoulder blade.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a strip of thick leather according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let two threads be at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a席卾; and then throw its broken arm over the strip so that it reaches the midpoint of where the curvature of the strip is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor place the fracture at its proper position, so that the fracture returns in the correct manner.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be resuspended over its own neck, and suspend the hand of the shoulder with a thread; then command two servants that one of them hold what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other hold the rest of the patient; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one ligament and over that with another, and any of the two ministers extend to both their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle part of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other part to cover the fracture.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then place the ligament over that location and over that knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess forms, then leave the tension within for seven days, and place a pad of moistened wool between that and let it rest with oil rubbed between until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the plaster; then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the position of a brace, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use braces.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that brace over the fracture which is wider and stronger than the other braces; and place the distance of the width of one digit between each brace, with the length of the braces according to the breakage plus three digits in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then firmly place the braces at the location of the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And ensure that your bandage over the location of the fracture is tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, make the bandage less tight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you adjust the position of the braces and the bandage as we have said when restoring the limb to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear the formation of an abscess, cauterize, then leave the bandage and braces in place as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And for three days consider the ligament in all parts to prevent accident or inflammation in the area; or is forbidden food to reach the member by disposition of excess stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that no cause will occur of this, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's body be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place yourself over a bed of woolen cloth fully covered, and consider at every hour of the night or day that no figure of the broken member be distorted, or that the ligament be softened; therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And withhold food from the patient according to the order which we have mentioned before, assuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; then gradually increase the amount of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For customarily the legs and their sides are strengthened within forty days; then they should be loosened and bathed, and a salve should be applied to them which corrects that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not yet healed, then do not loosen it for that until the ligaments and stitches are removed or after two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which we call the little bone, while the latter is large and is that which rests on top of the smaller one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the large bone is broken alone, or the small one, and if they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and its healing is even lighter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fracture of the leg is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse when they break two stable bones.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small upper leg bone, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, which involves a slight extension to facilitate realignment.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large leg bone is broken, then you must apply more significant extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both leg bones are broken together, then you must apply the traction more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand figure to restore it and extend it over a cushion, while the wrist of the hand is above the upper parts, more so than the others, and the auricular finger is below the other fingers, and the leg be centered on a tilted chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of it at the height or straight, so that the leg does not further strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extend the arm from that side and place it or bandage it, and another minister extend similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor aligns the bone ends that are displaced according to the best possible alignment.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are displacements in the bone fracture, then you must reduce the entire piece to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a displaced piece that prevents the continuity of the bone and is not as hoped for in the restoration of it, then you set it aside and reduce it according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is open, I have already treated this separately, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with a wick made of rouged oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness. You tightly wrap this cloth over the area between which the abscess can be drained; then remove the wick and apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdenum mixed with honey, and place a bandage; then place the bandage over that fracture on the side and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the bones in the arm I saw in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one limb or in two limbs together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and the greater the tension on the parts above or below the fracture, the more moderately you should apply the compression according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough, and the fat and oil which is strengthened should be of the proper mixture between fine and coarse, as we have recounted.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if some cause arises for which a correction is necessary, as you foresee what happens to the limb, then make sure that you immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And keep the limb from being compressed until it has rested, and then remove the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction is already softened and the bone is already set and appears like those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that a little and leave it for some days until nutrition flows to that, and strengthen it accordingly.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then you must not let it slip for about 20 days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the patient's hand with its virtue of movement-agitating substances, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or lightly in 28 days, and all of this is according to the complexity and dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Wrist and Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there may be a fracture, and do not injure them but rub them gently.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, ensure that the patient remains lying down and keep the limb straight for about one hundred equal parts of time, then place your hand over the extended limb.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them with good reduction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the rupture is in the interior parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a bunch of linen, and command the patient to hold that tightly with his ruptured palm; then have him hold it tightly with linen long.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the candle be held in linen which is light, so that the wax is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outer parts, then place another strip of cloth above the bone and another on the part, in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the bandage, as if you were turning your hand at a right angle between your fingers with grains of wheat.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you accidentally fracture one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, equalize it according to its position and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip above the right side so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where the fracture is; or bind all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above the fracture, as we have said for the tip.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cautery and opposition—during your operation—according to what is indicated when such a cause occurs, as detailed in the narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the rib bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The rib bone, when fractured, is felt according to where it is displaced forward and backward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and placing another ligament below the fracture. The patient should be laid on his side and face downward.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the physician extends the ligament along its proper part according to the quality of the fracture, when the break is in the middle of the rib bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is applied to the angle of the rib, then place the ligament along the groove of the lower part, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is applied to the groove, then place the ligament along the groove, and the extension to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to natural form; the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and a bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for some days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be made as follows: first ensure you wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the bandage near the fracture at the breaks, ensuring the ends of the needle extend well above both parts, then wrap the excess bandage around the bandage and thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place something over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and thigh with many towels, so that the tension is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The closer you are to the site of the fracture, the tighter, more firm, and less soft your bandage should be.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the foot's cavity, and tighten both ends of the stakes on the other side so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the bandage over it so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation and resembles those; if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then apply the appropriate remedy, and correct whatever occurs promptly, as we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is badly damaged, then try to equalize it as much as possible; if not, set it and immobilize it, and care for that which was preceded by the recollection until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But still, in such a manner restored, no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or another leg is applied, then it is necessary that the other one limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the hip is strengthened in about ten days or a few more weeks, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often results in multiple days of atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if the fracture does occur, it is often only a crack or a break in its parts, which can be one or several cracks, and above all, it is accompanied by pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and conjoined according to what is possible by equilibrium, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and your hand on that round stake, if you need it; hold firmly above at the stricture to that which is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses, cauterization, and appearance to those that arise when one opposes it to any accident until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the ribs there are two bones, one of which is large and is named the rib bone; the other is thin and is named foible.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of the species of fracture occur to the ribs as they do to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason the restoration of the rib is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you break two bones together, the fracture will be set in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the finer bone is broken, the fracture will be set in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and it is one of those conditions that is not under your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Nevertheless, if the fracture of the bone is lined with black spots, let the extension be lesser and more gentle, and may your virtue relieve it.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the bone, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you equalize the tendons and complete your entire surgical procedure, then take pieces of pine bark which are placed under the causes that are stopped up in soles, and make them thus from palm branches; leave aside those with little grain, and not of rough texture, and let their length be according to the length of the bone, and of the depth within the flesh.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be below at the base location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two stakes in three positions of both extremities and at the middle position, for in this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning towards the right or left side, and it should be in good alignment.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a brace of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and the leg is placed in it so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially make sure you do this in fractures, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called so.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg on each day and study it for any sign of infection, or swelling due to other similar causes; and if any cause from those occurs, then immediately apply what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	An ankle does not fracture completely; more often fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes of the foot, and do not fracture but are rubbed in the appropriate place.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared ground in this manner.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and cover it, and place the abdomen of the foot on a small table with two raised ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tightly wrap the foot with the bandage in a straight manner, after you have wrapped that area with cloth and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days pass, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are aligned, or are broken, or are dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and align them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly crooked at the end; then lay the skin on this table which you have prepared, and tightly bind it properly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken part straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and standing on one of the table's ends, stitch the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And you should remember that not all causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed are relevant here; and you should adapt your approach to the specific case at hand.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella bone and the groin of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, place that part in a crooked position to allow it to heal, and then slightly incline it towards the side of the wound, keeping it stable behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and this is done in the thigh as she wishes; and then the woman is supported, and her leg is slowly elevated little by little, for all of this must be done carefully so that it is aligned with how she wishes and the broken bone returns to place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it, and then have her urinate. Then return the leg according to the manner in which you adjusted it at the beginning, and finally return to its original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or so, for it will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it with a cannula of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the wound, then blow through the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with cloth and kept for some days according to our recommendation, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and knitting of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that rarely occur, especially to one who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major dispositional virtues in the restoration and construction of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And in the case of the thigh bone of a man when it is broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to apply this method to those upon whom a displaced fracture occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or tibia, or similar. You should set and trepan the area frequently, provided that the conditions for trepanation permit, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement exudes pus, then apply your set to retain it and attempt to sprinkle on it a sieved trissa, if another cause does not prevent this.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that first method day, and do not prolong this if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess does occur, then you leave the restoration of it for the ninth day, until it is lanced, and do not approach it on the seventh and tenth days, for then you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the bone is broken and prominent over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and align it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not to your satisfaction and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; for which reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, each with a margin at the sides; and be thick on the underside, but thin within.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the patient be raised above the end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And draw it back in one motion so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is fine and does not take hold with the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part according to what is suitable for it among the incisors which we have mentioned; it may be in one of the grooves in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then clean the bone of roughness and small scraps.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences severe pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar that is tightly wrung out, and properly during summer, and do not stay over the wound with charcoal or any other cause involving oil, so as to prevent it from occurring putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon when the restoration of the bone is completed, and leave the wound uncovered so that it can dry, using clamps and dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused this to happen to their patients, and brought about their death or a severe and corrosive illness, which is unhealthful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your slight, moist condition is different from the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not stay over those points. Instead, place hard cloth bandsages there instead of steams and support it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days after the wound begins to heal, a blister appears in it, then you lift the cloth which you had placed over that area, and immediately apply blisters, ointments of which we customarily use to treat wounds, thus applying tetra-pharmacon and resembling it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus drains from it with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the blister been drawn from it, then you should know that here the small blisters are stagnating. You must examine the wound by piercing it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those stagnations, those that are separated remain and are extracted, while those that do not separate and cause pain in the limb, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you notice pus or bad humors in the wound, it is a sign of stasis or another form of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment for such conditions, which is detailed in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that in which the main speech is contained, you make present your presence: when the large bone is broken, you stand over the member thus as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and resemble those of the large members, and do not presume extraction of it, nor the introduction of motas, for if such accidents happen by this there will be death; having left that which can decay, for strong it will fall by itself in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of a node that occurs in the area of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motas visible occur in this node in the area of the fracture's healing, and more so as it is near the joints, and they distort the shape of the member; and strongly you prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the node is recent and administer those medicines that have constricted thus with aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and resemble those; try which of them you take some or all, and confirm those as astringent, or made from white oak, or made from vinegar, and place those over the node in wool, and constrict those upon it by good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the compression bandage in place for several days; then remove it and replace it with another, during which time the swelling should subside; or strengthen the lead sheet hanging down, as lead has the property of reducing anything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a boil and is hard, and necessity dictates to incise it, then cut through the more superficial part of it, and incise the superfluous and projecting part, or lance it with a small hot instrument until the swelling subsides; and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when restored and subsequently allow the delicate member to heal according to its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and subsequently allow the delicate member to heal according to its natural course, this is done for several reasons: one reason is due to the insufficient dissolution of the membrane and the improper healing process; or due to excessive compression of the membranes, hindering nutrition from reaching the member; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or due to a lack of strength in the body of the patient and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make his heart tender while the disease multiplies within him; give him baths; and insert hope and joy into him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the wet compress with vinegar, allowing the nourishment to flow and return to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of fractured bones when they are reduced tortuously and the operation is prohibited from that which causes pain.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is already reduced near the completion of its reduction and healing of the fracture and protrusion in the broken bone, and this is due to the deformation of the member, yet the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then you should not receive the word from someone who thinks that member is newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are many skilled surgeons and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in a liquid of white wine in which are infused soft herbs, such as hyssop, rosemary, and melilot, resembling those; and prepare for it an ointment of ointment with well-prepared glycerin; or that is prepared with mucilage of herb of age and is mixed with wool gray or olive oil, and is applied with that; or that are prepared with fatty figs and are tied with goose feathers, resembling those of the medicines named armenian consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by gentle friction that is applied to the more humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong, turning into a stone, and requires treatment, then it should be incised above the cecum and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved and divided. That which is superfluous from the nodulation of that method should be removed from the bone with sharp scissors, and facilitation should be administered in that area with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in the body, which prohibits movement and distorts the shape of the limb, causing significant pain and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to immediately try to reduce it as soon as possible. If delayed, the area can become infected and make the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, one should neither be too tight nor too loose during the infection period, as tight or loose bands can cause spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this occurs, you should immediately perform a flail amputation of the foot, and allow it to rest until the infection subsides; then, apply hot water and oil to the limb, and try to reduce the dislocation with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each limb should be treated with the remedy of which its location will remind you.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body upwards, then downwards, and thus.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is caused in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with a small movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, during which they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and cannot have that nor can close their mouth, and their tongue is wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place in major displacements by itself due to minor causes.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	More often, if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then you must apply a gentle reduction immediately, and not delay it entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor with one hand in the cavity of the dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both his thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside aligned with those; and command the patient to cease moving his jaw and allow those to return from any part; and the doctor align the jaw and enclose the jaw inside as it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powders of cloth with cerot, made of wax and oil rubbed; and soon apply it with facilitated ligaments many times.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not sweat at the right or left side; and do not force him to vomit for any cause; having his food stopped until when the pains subside and the jaws are relaxed, then let him vomit what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be given for easy administration, and you should not trouble the opening of the mouth with eating, drinking, and speaking until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then moving and shaking accidents will cause fevers and frequent swelling. And the belly of the patient is greatly swollen, and there is much vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and shaking treatments may occur to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the leg inward by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then apply your palm to the area with firm pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place your hand over the area with the plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh does not get dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and as you are able.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand over the area with the plaster, powder, and compress, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol. xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And chiefly it is dislocated outward and off the bone at the back parts of the tendon, especially in those where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it is outward with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes it happens to some men due to a blow or impact, and the muscle of the affected area becomes infected with an abscess, and is damaged because it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then proceed that you treat this especially well, and then proceed in the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, you must palpate; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. By palpating the head of the muscle, it should feel like a hole, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear or move it in any direction.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must palpate the foot or ankle, and then you find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the shoulder; then places his fingers on the sides to palpate, and elevates the joint with strength at its location. The minister then raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then holds the area so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If however it does not return through what we have said, and the dislocation began with a swelling, for several days, then let the foot be bathed in cold water and an application that softens and liniments be given thus as if of roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the foot is to be laid on its back and placed in the fleece that is equal between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the spica, elevates the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the foot with his hand so that it is not injured at the joints, and another minister holds the head of the foot, so that it is not injured at the joints, for there it quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the other as follows: and this is that you have a person who is longer than the foot, standing on the side of that sole, and insert his muscle under the sole's fleece and elevate the sole's fleece to the joints above while the foot is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the foot from the joints below its belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then see that something else is suspended, for fear that the gravity will cause the dislocation to return soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with its head round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then the patient is laid down over the head of the pole; then cover his body from the other side with lion skins, and let the patient lie according to the length of the pole, and extend your hand to the parts on the other side; and extend the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a pole whose length is about two cubits, and its thickness is four fingers, and its size should be enlarged at the tip according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place lion skins over the round head to ensure the pole does not dislocate the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head, and extend your hand or arm into the parts, and tie the limb to the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended to the parts, and the other limb be suspended from the other side, so that the joint may soon relax.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for him is completed in any way that is possible, then cover the head with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place a plaster prepared from powder of molten wax and albumen of egg over all the muscle, thus thoroughly applied, and tightly bind the head with a bandage; the limb should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and let it be left without moving the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the food for the patient is light, until the limb is comfortable, which is better for the recovery of the limb.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more seven or five times and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to numerous attacks by humidity that affect it or for another cause, then it must be treated with a cautery three times, as stated previously in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and stricture remain over it for several times, yet still not healed with cauterization and cannot lift that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle at the head of the muscle are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be placed in its proper place at any time.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of what is caused, you should lift the foot and thigh or the parts behind, and the reduction is performed by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be administered in the other stricture, and care that within it be healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there happens to be gravity in the member and tardiness in its movement, then the patient uses warm baths until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol.xxvi.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, especially forward and backward. The dislocation of the knee cannot be concealed; whether you see it quickly or touch it according to whatever shape it is dislocated, when you adjust the dislocated knee into place, this is clearly evident because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And note the swelling, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it comes to an abscess, reduction becomes difficult, and even with great effort, it is not fully cured; especially when it is in the back part, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and hot baths often bring about death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended by two more, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on his knees, and let him push the joint with the heels of his hands or between the palm of his hand as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand against his own hand, striking the knee with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong manipulation.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold that posture with two ministers so that it is not pulled back during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint vigorously as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity, place it over the bandage in which there is a clot and exudation of white pus, and extend it with a downward traction, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then release it; and so if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if it happens that there is gravity near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply that in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over it for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion, once, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and weathered groove on the edge and press strongly upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and allow it to come into its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of such dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, there should be speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the shoulder of the patient on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The physician then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Moreover, however, it must be considered if the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand, then the patient pauses the two fingers of his hand on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is precedent, place the two fingers of the hand, then the position of the hand of that intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor falls over that potentiality of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so, if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, then strengthen that and wrap the abscess, leaving that alone; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, you should neither suffer nor be able to proceed with the reduction of it until days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Moreover, however, the joint is to be treated according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and then there is no harm in it so long as you strengthen it with a cautery near the site and fortify it with this providing some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the gout has returned, then pause over the dressing which we have recommended, and let it be strengthened for five days; and then release it and leave it, and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement in it has been obstructed and some gravity occurs in it, then apply that which is cold and with friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	For some time, reduce the fingers completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in the palm itself, hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as though you are doing so, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and hold that at that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as though you are doing so when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When you encounter any of the vertebrae in the back or neck completely dislocated, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure, for death ensues to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion escapes against their will, and they cannot retain it; many times, the muscles of the patient or their legs or their arms, or one of those, become softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple vertebrae are displaced and multiple vertebrae cause the removal of those to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is relaxed at the rear parts and is named jaundice.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider whether jaundice arises from biliousness, then in that case there is no cure and neither does it heal completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those cases where it comes from congestion or percussion or resemblance to those, the Ancients have spoken at length about the methods of cure, detailing which returns most effectively. But I shall now abbreviate what is necessary from their teachings, for my own closeness to understanding allows me to explain this clearly and format it into various instruments from which I will show and expand upon them.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in jaundice arising from the front part of the feet, it neither begins nor heals; similarly, in those where it arises from two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only jaundice arising in both sides properly as I have described is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And in such a way that the patient is laid out on his back close to the wall, and is spread out so that his feet are well apart.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stake upright, inserted into the ground at the head end of the patient, and another stake vertically through the feet of the patient at the other end of the stake.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister hold the stake, and it is not fixed in a hole; another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and tightly bind it with a firm ligature; extend the end of the ligature to the stake which is fixed at the head of the patient, and tie that there; and firmly bind another ligature around the hips of the patient under his armpits, and hold his legs; and adjust all the ligatures and tie those to the other stake which holds the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the ligature to the part of the stake, and do not move the two stakes and the ligatures in which they are inserted, but they should not be fixed thus as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and cut into the wall where we said was near the hernia a place at the edge of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other edge, and compresses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a turn which is revolving in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the end of the fingers of two sticks, the length of each being one braccio, and place the patient's head at the end of the fingers of two sticks similarly; and let the distance between each stick be a palm, and then in each stick thread a cord, and let each be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round stick for the turn, and it should be rotated in the two grooves of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a groove in which the stick is placed, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is rotated; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the groove in which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the turn in which you place its legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each turn and have a minister that twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor hold the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is held, then cover it with a paste of honey, and about wool; then place a strip of tablecloth over the paste, whose width should be about three fingers or almost that, and its length such that it covers the area of yellow bile, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the litharge which we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger at the site where healing ends, then ensure that medicines that moderate and soothe are administered gradually over a long period, which we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is being administered in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes accidents occur at the very end of the vertebrae, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone where you already suspect that no suspicion should be allowed to arise about it with this medicine, for it will greatly cause your accident to lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only occur due to dislocation alone, and do not occur in those cases where other small movements and cavities are involved.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four manners; it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the rear parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is mostly dislocated to the inner parts, and little to the front or rear parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the footband of the healthy side against the injured side, the latter appears longer and the sole more prominent than the healthy one. The injured foot cannot bend its toe; this is the location where you should cauterize the lengonar, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that the injuries of the foot are contrary to this dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that you expand the footband according to need, but it cannot bend the toe that is in pain. If forced to go further and it cannot do so toward the front parts; his urine is retained and his swelling is apostemat, and you should treat his ambulation on the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And a sign of dislocation in the parts behind is that the leg does not expand, nor can it bend what should bend, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the knee is deviated from that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old and already degenerated, you should reduce it as soon as possible according to its position. However, this is not part of the entire treatment; then, one should avoid making assumptions about it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, you should reduce it by returning the joint to its position and extending it inward and outward, then manipulate it to the right and left sides, as it will naturally return with force and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterpoise and extend the thigh from that side, or on its hands, or with linseed which is soaked over the thigh above the buttock; another minister should extend his hand from above to ensure his hands touch the tickly parts of the patient; then apply strong linseed paste to the back of the knee, and have another minister press the extremity of the linseed.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is the extension from the root inside the angle to the part of the fork, or from the back part to the side of the thigh.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in one go, so that the patient's leg is elevated from his body and hangs down dangling.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good. Otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is on the inner parts, ensure that the patient's leg is flexed towards his side; then place the ligaments over the groove of the thigh in that area where it lies between the head of the femur and the location where the angle is placed; and extend the ligament from above the part of the angle to the next part of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly holds the thighs, compresses the thick part of the thigh, and extends to the outer parts with a strong extension, for then it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of a lighter cure for which this member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you excuse me and do not follow the training for this species of cure, then ensure that both feet of the patient are tightly bound together firmly, loosely over both the ankles and both the toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the patient be suspended over the stake's head, and let the hand hold it; and let the length from the ground be the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to hold down the patient's thigh, and let another strong youth suspend the patient, while the other holds down the thigh with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction itself, when dislocation is at the outer part, ensure that the patient lies on his side according to what we have recommended for the lying position; and strengthen the bandage over the affected leg and around its foot.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two poles are placed aside, one on the foot and the other on the head; and then poles adjusted in the middle of the fire laid over which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not burned because the pole is between the thighs of the patient, for you must allow the extension from the parts left undone to be felt.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand diligently over it, as we said in the equalization for that part.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May the patient lie quietly on his side where the pain is located.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is good for the leg to be extended slightly, and this is according to this method as narrated for the foot; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the injured part, and then draws that with the other hand, and at that drawing, he extends the leg from the parts left to the front part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is behind the parts, then do not extend the patient's legs, but elevate them above the ground; you should place them on a hard surface as if the width of the leg were dislocated outward, according to what we have said about its positioning between two widths; and their face and limbs should be extended, as we have said, without much difficulty.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compress should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and you notice the sign of the joint's reduction, which is that you can extend both legs and when you test them they equalize and the leg returns to its normal position — then you place two cushions and wrap tightly with bandages so that the width is not altered in any part; and adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see equal signs in the wound, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and extend it according to your original structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that, and let it gradually heal over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol..xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; and it is not dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their waist; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make a direct incision in the malade, essay that it already extends its leg over this; attach your two fingers to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then make attach your sole against the palms of yours, and keep those between your named fingers against the sole of him with strength, and another minister extend his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its submission is that its leg adheres to the thigh lightly without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that and attach the leg to the thigh, and place those occasionally with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the malade for ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narrative was narrated.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the treatment of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle restoration, and it is that it be extended with ease and returned to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the complement, make sure you do it right, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the foot at the midpoint.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the top part of the foot, and your left hand on the bottom part below the foot at the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to your right hand, and toward the left for two passes, and extend the left; and push the foot on the right should lower the leg thereby.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this for two passes as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot towards the third pass on the leg, and you are at the knee.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if it returns in one or two passes according to this manner, and if you can hold the foot still, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for if it does not return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if reduction of the foot is forbidden as we have advised, then let the patient lie on his side on the ground, and place a firm pillow under him, so that it lies between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped a cloth around him to prevent the foot from slipping.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister hold his thighs, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or with cloth tied around the leg; and then each minister extends himself against the length of his part, and the pillow is placed between the patient's thighs holding him, so that the body of the patient is not pulled to the sides as you extend your length.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assists by holding the healthy thigh at the points left, so that the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be healthy, then apply a strong paste there, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And take care to avoid the nerves behind the talus, for the lint over that area should not be strong or severely irritate them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint becomes moist, replace it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk before that time, be sure that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs at that site, then take care to administer in the extraction of it what we have described in our narrative before, in another location for treatment and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	First, ensure that what is dislocated can be reduced with slight extension; and what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in several bones of the big toe, then you must place the foot on a slightly elevated surface or on a table, and keep it thus as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on your feet, and place your foot over the area where the joints are located. Gently press that part with your foot to encourage it to return to its proper position, and observe if it has been reduced and no prominence appears in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table that can accommodate the entire foot, which has two supports. Gently maintain this structure firmly for three days; then remove it and allow the foot to rest by walking for several days until it strengthens and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of displacement that occur from injury or fracture or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the cure of that and its restoration, mishaps may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it; but rather, one who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful, and pious; who waits, not rash, nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that cause blisters only temporarily, leaving the disease to divine judgment, but to those to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of the illness, in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before blisters occur.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that causes blisters only and heals the injury with what is appropriate for it from drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the separated bones, then you must realign their joints, doing so as we have said in the simple ailments that precede here in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true conscience those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless.
Amen.	Amen.
