Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion and the end it brings, and by its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is part of surgical operation, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the operation of surgery is prohibited in our region and in our times, yet it is a science that should not be neglected, and its principles are well-known; and only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients have survived, which correct many errors and hesitations among them, thus understanding of it has diminished and its force and art have been weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that I should vitalize that part of this treatise in accordance with the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes in line with the forms of the surgical instruments, including their addition by declaration and preparation, which is necessary for the cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More than that, the reason why a good artisan does not apply his hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and difficult, and one must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well, knowing the youth of the members and their forms, the joints and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, their number and their properties; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their contraction and expansion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this, Hippocrates is said to have named it "Mot," but in his smaller work, more so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More than that, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy will fall into error on this account, which will cause men to die, as I have seen too many of them. For some are formed in this science but proceed from the other sciences and their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor who caused an apostematosis escrophularia in the neck of a woman, and severed some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed, and the woman died from this.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who almost drained a stone from a man who had been suffering from his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he drained that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the stone to be removed, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient lying there, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had suffered a fracture in the thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then let it rest for a few days as commanded that we release the ligament; and thus remain so until the thigh and foot are fully healed, and only then proceed.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and success brought peace and an attempt to relieve his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But nonetheless, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not prevent it, and did not cease to circulate the corruption in the member while the illness persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there was another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which the malignity of the illness increased in the lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain is purely of melancholic humor, and does not affect the whole body, but rather affects a member which suffers from being assailed by it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and one where the work is perilous in the major preparations.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in all parts of this book in which the operation is filled with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with zeal and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible diseases difficult to cure, and place your weapons against what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not abandoned: for more remains to your glory, and more in this world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gout is already dissected in some monastic texts:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat disease with bad medicine, so that bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the head concerning the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on cups, and on plaigs, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torcicollo (a distortion of the neck), and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatment of the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will describe the quality of the coals for the cautery and the ingredients used, as well as in what condition a cautery should not be used.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its ingredients is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; much has been spoken about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. To me, a little from their sermons will suffice, for fear of lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that the cautery comforts all kinds of universal ailments which are either in flesh or sinew, except for two kinds, which are gout ailments.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry gout ailment, the flesh desiccates; for some said that the cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that the cautery is not suitable for a malady which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such a malady be treated with something that is itself dry and cauterizing.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say that those who say the opposite are correct, for through the cautery, it is beneficial in all dry gout ailments that come in men's bodies. For when you compare the body to its humors and to the nature of fire, you find the body to be fiery.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the saying of those who have experienced this and discovered it several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not claim to have experienced this as much as those who have been well-versed in the use of the cautery through long practice, and who have come to know the diversity of human nature and the disposition of ailments in their various forms, and the causes of these, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of such times.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no need for fear, and especially in wet and flaccid illnesses, since all doctors are agreed on those, and do not differ in applying cautery in them during youth.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, in medicine involving burning instruments, is because fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and causing no great harm to other members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And the action of burning medicine reaches there in the members where it touches, and strongly brings to the member an illness that is difficult to cure and quickly afflicts it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything but to evaporate superfluous substances. We already know this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my speech. If it were not that this is not written freely in this pause, and that you do not know the secret of the fire, which relates to the quality of its operation on bodies and the way it expels illnesses, a philosophical demonstration would be appropriate, which would enlighten your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And be wise, children, that they do not disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at any time, because the damage from the accidental timing is submerged in the youth of what is cauterized, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong wounds, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that those caused by evil intent are greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus do not trust in these, children, for they are only valued by the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness which is cured by cautery it is not convenient at all times, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is nothing more in medicine than a means to alter the composition and dry the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, an excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its virtue and effectiveness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of his illness, and its virtue, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him, and what is acquired by him in his nutrition and semblance of those causes; but the illness where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain does not return there, more so when it is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more commonly said is that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a saying used by surgeons, not what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except the cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and the understanding that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not suffice, and at the end of the treatment, one administers a cautery, which then benefits.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point from here, the last remedy of medicine is a cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely dry; for I have already tried this and examined it, and found that it only works in some bodies but not others. A gold cautery is good and better than iron as they say; yet when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it has not been declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; if you apply it over the ignition, the gold melts through the fire, and cases in the fire several sheets so that the artisan can cut by the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely aligned with the proper operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those of the leg, so that I delay the asking for what one wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servant accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of swelling and a multitude of traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the regions of the cheeks and ears discharging, and a multitude of sleepiness, and toothache, and yawning, and generally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytic, swelling, apoplexy, and symptoms in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient, their age, and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that his head be shaved, and afterwards cut his hair on a leaning bench and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor from your palm near his toes on the razor between his heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More importantly, since the right place has been determined, mark that place with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery, which is in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place the heated cautery over the marked spot with a needle, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as a grain of barley, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or to another of those, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt, dissolve it on the spot, and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place your hand over the inflamed area on the side, leaving that part over the interior where the scar of the fire has been destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a tetrafarmaceutical ointment to the area until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the ankle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the specified bone is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then scrape away what is burned from the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly on the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphectus minor.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that location, the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And keep the wound open for a long time, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all, only in some men according to the way of fear; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when possible; for the head is developed by solution of continuity of it as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do so for health.
Capitol segon.	Capitulate second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When pain in the entire head is chronic and long-lasting, and this has been prolonged in the patient, using towels, cloths, poultices, plasters, bandages, cataplasms, and especially if a cautery has already been applied but does not improve with any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; if it is cold or does not have much swelling, then that cautery should be replaced by another.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and the quantity of the mouth which we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand thus, and do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this cautery in its place, for know that the cautery with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Head, top.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head, or a dull pain between the eyes, the head should be treated with purgative medicines to empty it, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, then cauterization of the head can be done in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a piece of aloes, heat it up, and divide its ends into both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid gently there and make the cut so it is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then strengthen over the place stopped by descending compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove and draw the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place it under water submerged for a while until the area dries.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then anoint the wound until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do what some burning medicines they have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be done according to this method: heat it with fire, for which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a key clamp, for the head of which has the form of a knife, in the middle of which there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered to it, and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the cut of the cord is as much as its quantity, lift your hand so that the artery is not adhered which is left, so that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then dip it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place a warm cloth over it, and apply ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this new migraine properly.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization for ancient migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve the patient, and sometimes due to the disease which is not cured by what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place a line on the area of pain that corresponds to its size, or mark it; then place your hand for a moment and strongly apply it there to incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But you must guard against the continuity of the jaw, which is disturbed by chewing, and ensure that the skin is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are not damaged, so that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or anxious; and leaves the operation to chance.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regulation of blood flow in cases of artery injury according to its manner, in place of this free text.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness has not reached this cautery and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery treatment for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and has been treated with other causes such as lactic acid, and another treatment as I have described in the division does not alleviate the pain, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the puncta near the beginning, and it should be directed around the entire ear as if rolling a wheel, or along the circumference of any part where the pain is located.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cautery at the root of the ear gradually moving it to the spot you have tested.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points in the entire ear, and then cool the areas, and proceed to cure the spots as they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cautery treatment for tetanus.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The inflammation which is cured and treated with a cautery is nothing but due to the winds passing through the veins, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid using the cautery for conditions due to drying or spasms of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that kind of inflammation by jarring, headache remedies, and gargles, and if you are not satisfied with your cure, then when you treat the disease with three cauteries: the first should be at the base of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery at the opposite site of the affected area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to place it along the outer part of the ear down a little above the corner of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the side of the finger. Then place your hand over the area where the quantity of the thickness of the wart has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown in front here.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that when you see a little bit like this; and carve with a knife for a slight excess of crudeness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area where it is shown after it has been treated until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said, and if the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat that area with four cauteries: especially on all the horns of its head; and with a cautery on the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the kidney.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And already it has been cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; and more posteriorly; and then treat this with what you are doing.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Apply that it be given to the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the服众消。
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then wrap the head of the patient completely and place it over the heart as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place it for a few moments, as this is the way to cauterize.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore, if by those means it is cured; and otherwise, then make three cauterizations at the rear part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head towards the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the thickness of your hand between each cautery, and then carefully apply the cautery as instructed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you add more to the malate and it is tolerable, then apply the cautery in the middle location; and if you add too much, then cauterize it over the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then carefully apply the cautery where it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the form.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery treatment of parazili and the mollification of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in mollification of the head with jellies and as we have said; then at the base of the malate, carefully apply the cautery in the middle location of the head, and over all its horns, and over the back part of it, and over three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of mollification of the body to add more cauteries and the malate is strong, then apply the cautery with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind with one cautery between which is firm from the backbone, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that which is within so that it is healed, and let this be an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, modify the brain of the patient at its beginning and in the other cure which we have described in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargling and chewing substances to the servant. Do this for several days, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then place the hand on the patient's head, and carefully cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the occiput, and over each corner of the head, cauterize it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those points as mentioned, while keeping the body paralyzed and softened around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And cauterize with olive oil as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross heat, then cauterize those points as we have said in keeping the body paralyzed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink what purifies their brain as described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place your hand on the patient's head, and properly make a tortora mark with it over the circle, and then pause in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is senseless from the cut, let him be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply the liniment; it is more worthy to rub on an old sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for a tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when more is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week, and use the other regimen until he is cured; or if you wish, make a cautery of it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a special cautery which wets the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cloth soaked in oil or in grey of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery with water descending on it.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the stomach by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of it, and keep the other one free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar be bathed in decoction for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize that spot with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of dysentery from water in two stomachs, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left unclosed; and let the cautery be long in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, as well as the caution against flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck leaving two bones really produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are old and frequently present in the veins and arteries, which are located in a manifest place on the head above, and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing in the feet, and use a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries in the neck leaving two temples, and two cauteries in the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add a cautery, then cauterize that area at the entire length of the sole of the foot near the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal foulness.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that patient as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give to drink the mallow seeds to the patient for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery made of iron and another of olive wood.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a cautery made of carnation on the two supraorbital regions, leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery so as not to burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the form of the carnation cautery is this.
Capitol .xv.	Capitulum XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for the mollification of the eyelids of the heel.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the heel is mollified due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that area on the two supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the sore.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and palm of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eyelid is converted to the inner parts, I must prick the eyelid. The cautery in these cases should be done according to two methods: either with a cautery or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is with fire, command the patient before applying that the skin be pricked as those which are cleaned, entering where they are prolonged and equalized; and if I prick it, you hold it at its origin. Then strengthen the eyelids of the patient with a bandage so that it does not get infected until the skin is regenerated.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and nearby place a hand over the eyelids of the patient to test, marking the mark in the shape of a laurel leaf, which is the beginning of the mark for the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a cold compress in the eye or on the mucus membrane of the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply the cautery over the shape marked, little by little in small circles, until the surface of the wound is burned, which appears as a laurel leaf, entirely apparent and proper.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of healing from this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye start to contract and the skin around it rise, indicating successful puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the compress to ensure the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery over that area just as you have done first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is healed, ensuring that the skin does not remain loose.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery that burns with medicine: command the patient to extend and heal the skin until it is stretched, and then make a cloth in the shape of a mistletoe leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a known soap and fresh fat, or what is equivalent to this, and mix these fats well, and prepare this mixture to prevent it from being rubbed; then spread this over the cloth which is made in the shape of a mistletoe leaf, and place that over one side or both; and place the other side carefully on a wick soaked in honey, and the patient's head be at the middle.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place it over the medicine and press it slightly but not too much so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, to perceive the atrophy's biting, when you leave the medicine and press that slightly as you said; therefore, when the biting ceases, place the medicine and wash it well with water; then consider if the eyelid has risen as it was washed; if so, apply the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the area where you did not press the medicine and ensure that your operation is equalized and constricted fully.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place it over the swelling between where the adherence has been eradicated, and then treat that with an ointment or another method so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must ensure that your operation is conducted with vigilant diligence so that the medicine does not fall into the wound. If the eyelid becomes softened over a few days or if any hair falls into the wound, then reapply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and do so in the same manner as at the beginning. Then irrigate it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the surgical leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your incision is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of the rectum must not be obscured for him to whom this art is studied.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the wound's lacrimal area.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of ailments and do not align your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have another minister hold the patient's head between your laps in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the cautery on the flesh in the fat of the wound or on the pustule over the patient's wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is hot, as is the form of a cane or a vuelto (a type of curved instrument), from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you insert it, let it penetrate to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out as it is drawn out.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and clean and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-heated cautery on it, and hold your hand a little above the entrance of the nose, so that your hand does not err or reach the patient if the wound is deep, and then place the cautery in the nostril and destroy that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; leave it thus for three days, and place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment once it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if after ten days it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is revealed and scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula which some first doctors will say: identify the location of the fistula and do it there, then place your hand on it with good retention, so that the ill humor does not enter because the melted lead does not reach there; cover it over the opening of the ill humor until it is well sealed like in a white of an egg or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said about the cautery and healing, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nostrum and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery treatment of the wound in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Red marks or cracks often occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cracks as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that hot cautery in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery treatment of fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops in the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth and quickly forms, and soon breaks open and becomes chronic, and then a fistula is formed, and you treat it but do not deepen the treatment, then heat the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula. Place the heated cautery into the track of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it. Do this one or two times. Then treat it with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the location and set the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, cure those with medicines and do not confere. Then place the patient's head in cold water, and soon ignite the cautery in the form which will be described below. Try to place the cautery flame over the tooth and insert it into that area strongly, keeping it there for a short time so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient rinses his mouth with salt water and keeps it there for an hour, then spits it out, as the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is tightened, and the humidity corrupted is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the application of cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a abscess or pus, and you cannot achieve relief with medical treatment, then the application of cautery in that area can be done in two ways: either with a calf's foot cautery or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a calf's foot is done by taking the foot of a calf and applying it to the place where the iron was placed. Then take a piece and wrap it around the tip of the probe, and immerse that with the bulbed part over the painful tooth, and keep it there pressing firmly until it becomes inflamed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply it several times until the virtue of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do, soak a piece of wool or a piece in the calf's foot as mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth, and keep the heated iron on it until the iron reaches the root cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, however, the cautery with fire you must attend to the wound of ear or of iron, and there be in its flesh some crusty substance and the acuity of the fire not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that over the dent and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well rubbed; and do this a few times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	Ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and keeps it that way for about an hour; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cautery the wound where you will cease according to what is possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery for extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophies are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and are not responsive to digestion through medicines, when you perform the digestion of those mildly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which follows: having two open extremities so that smoke arises from one end, and place that ignited part over the abscess for one time, and another if you feel it necessary before it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and let it remain for three days, placing a piece of wood over the deeper part where the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery is as conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol. xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery for hoarseness and the constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities affect the wall of the lung, and especially when it is due to cold constitution, then you must evacuate the patient at the beginning with medicinal laxatives, and then cautery the diseased vein in the area of distension.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not apply the cautery to the vein nor burn along its course but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the rear part of his spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And cauterize the collarbone in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which has been treated until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture, and the patient has no fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old illness, then cauterize two areas on the furcula over the depressions called lion's breasts and buoys; and another cautery in the middle of the foot area between the two mammary glands; and use a collarbone cautery as previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make point cauteries at the locations where it is called puncta, and the form of which you describe in the section on puncturing for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points into them; then carefully tend to that which the preceding method treats until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And having the cautery with three prongs, the cautery is applied in this manner: with one pass you can make three cauterizations according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should reduce its dislocation while it is in the process of returning, and by a slight movement, it will be relocated as it strives to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, then place the patient on their back or on their side; lift the knee which is in the inner part of the iliac region towards the outer parts above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain where that enters the other limb; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery has.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and according to the subtlety of the wound in quantity; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because the cauteries are .viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery for a while, and then make the patient adhere to rest, so that the limb is not used for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pricked cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is alleviated and the patient is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is caused by moisture and humidity that extract from its composition and multiply within it, if you continue the curative methods without success, then you can suspect that gout has settled on his back, extending its hands and things. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cauterization on the foot with a cauterization of the size of a finger's width, and two cautery placements on the sides of the cauterization, forming the figure of a triangular cauterization; and leave space between those not to be too close as they will cause suppuration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cauterization be as follows. If you wish, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this shall be a cauterization in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized with punctures where one is afraid of the cautery: and you prick the stomach with a point according to the quantity you want to test, then cauterize there with the puncture; then cure it with the cure that comes before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the sore foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has not yet been expelled from its normal state through superfluous evacuation, and the ill state is treated as we have said and you do not find relief, then you should cause the foot to be placed on its neck, and prick three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity over the foot below the hypochondria, with one along the side of a person lying on their back.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be between each cauterization according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizations be according to the length of a straight person's body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not place your hand on the cautery while it is hot.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the swelling of the affected toe, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, when lying down, which has already extended its parts, raising its knees.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to apply these cauteries with a surgical cautery when using your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard that you do not overapply the cautery, so that the cauterization affects the entire toe and spreads into the intestines, for the toe here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol. xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the buttock and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the buttock or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the buttock, the patient will experience increased gravity and pain intensity.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the buttock, then the pain will be intense and often causes the doctors great fatigue in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, make sure the patient is lying on their side; and then find the location of the abscess and attempt to identify it; and then apply the cautery, which resembles a reed in shape, as shown in the preceding page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it such that the entire cord is burnt, until it reaches the chord, in healthy flesh.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it must be that this cautery is used only by those whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and in most of which maladies they are acquainted; but this one has been experimented upon several times in this operation, yet I leave that to your discretion, for it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery for ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for ulcers was made by taking from the branches of aristolia a long stick of wood, which is found and has a thickness similar to a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and use this cautery to cauterize at that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; then leave two small cauteries guided, one slightly inclined towards the side where the beard begins, and two more cauteries in the area that is declining between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining a little towards the back; and place another cautery in the middle of the foot; and place another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the back; and place one cautery in the location between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on each side of the foot, placing the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And ensure that your hand is on the cautery, not off with the handle of the cautery.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient authors say that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is cleared, as we said when treating the inguinal abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery, for often it happens in the location of the fistula which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery treatment for the wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the wound, as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not change your treatment, then the cautery for it is according to three ways, all of which are correct. Of these, one way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the wound, following the figure of the cautery for the abscess, the figure of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have described for the abscess cautery equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two vertices, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the chain which is in the direction of the seam along which the juice of the patient's left side flows.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then place the two vertices together, ignite the fire, and in that space where you insert the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you do, cauterize with the cautery having three vertices.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery more when it has remained too long without burning, as this is more conducive to healing than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used for dropsy but for the ankle properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, apply four cauteries in the circuit of the swelling, one on the stomach, another on the back, another on the spleen, two between the spine vertebrae, one on the outer side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And place the cautery there so that it stays hot for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the bad humor near the cautery with that which you use so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be accelerated by the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form as described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellowish water, cut out the part of the foot where it is between the big toe and the little toe, and place your hand on the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand from the cautery, but do not return it completely, as the yellow water will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be done in this manner: And then make two cauteries on each thigh, and on each side at the lower end of the surgical cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be done according to the length of the thigh: and place one end of the cautery at the top of the thigh, and the other end in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water seeps into it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the ailments which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity penetrating its thickness, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and the intestines. This is treated according to the methods of cure without conferring, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of vital virtue, so apply a large cautery over their stomach according to what was described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine humors, using a subtle clavil cautery; or use a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then apply a cautery over the pentil and over the intestines, and strengthen it by placing two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the youth of the which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature derived from ancient hemorrhoids or from thick humors or corrupt humidity, and they are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not apply your own cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the two small and slightly triangular parts, and with a cautery above the navel down by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they consumed was not digested, and their face appears flushed, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and use one cautery on the groin, and another on the thigh with a pointed cautery. Let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery treatment near the site of lithotomy.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the thigh, then heat the cautery that resembles a rod.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that heated cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between them as they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over several areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts around it.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is an old fistula in the natural rear and it is corrupted by bad health and humidity, then what is most worthy to probe is with a thin needle, and you know the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Kindle the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And kindle that cautery and place it in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the needle.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And cure the area once it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut away from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you can see that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not held away from it, then you can see that they are penetrating or in the vicinity of the wound causing corruption, or this comes from those causes which will be remembered in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts become painful due to rubbing or excessive moisture, and as a result the patient's pain increases, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery over each wart using a claw-like instrument, for which you will find more details later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And cauterize it forcefully the second time with a small break, because three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol. xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part on the side of the bladder, where the skin begins at the groin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toes; cauterize that part with a cautery on the lower side of the toe, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be as hot as the process requires.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the urethra.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous congestion and humidity in the urethra, and for this reason, intercourse is prohibited, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to its condition, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower side of the toe, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be hot.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors infiltrate the area of the ankle, and cause displacements in their location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated with a hot cloth.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cauterize the ankle with the cautery in a circular manner, as you have marked the circuit of the area as it is rotated, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the form of the cautery as mentioned before is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then use three large olive wood cautery sticks.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be made according to the strength of the inflammation in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol forty.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain in the sciatic nerve occurs and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with the method we have said and you do not apply it. This is an ancient method, so if you cannot relieve the patient of large cold humors, use bad-smelling pills or artificial ones or similar; then cauterize the area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cautery for this is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with a fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, of which one is to make three triangular cautery marks on the sciatic area and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the spacing between each cautery mark should be equal to the width of a finger, whether using an olive cautery or a larger one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cautery in the middle of each location on the base of the spine, as there are four cautery marks.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle around which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the lateral part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the surgical cautery is used, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle passes through the pain that is extended near the base of the feet, then cauterize there where you pass the cautery with three or four points, or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle passes through and the pain is felt in the thigh, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in every cautery, do not finish with the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or a major artery, for thereby you are badly injured or cause a contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several cases where doctors cauteryed the spot and finished with the cautery, the bedfire inflamed between which the tumor reached the skin, the fire perforating and corrupting all the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then there is a severe solution of the belly, and then death follows.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cautery each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery of water: this is the method: make a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and its holes should be according to the size of anfinger bone or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there is another third; and the space between them is the width of a thumb; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those lines is one finger or two fingers, and make them on the edge of the iron properly fitting into the circles; this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approximately it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red and emits sparks, and approximately it is placed over the part of the water, the patient lying on the latz (couch).
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize it with three round cautery marks in one pass.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And approximately let it be for three days; then apply a plaster with grease and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Oh, son, of this species of cautery we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and for those which we have found concerning it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More from the good cautery for him who suffers it, and find it to be in that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More, a cautery with adhering medicines is that you make two circles having a perforated frame in which go the sparks of the iron door; let the length of the walls in their thickness be two nuts or quarters.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the patient's thighs due to the size of the swelling; and they have been opened below and above, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the spot on the flank where the patient is feeling pain, and hold your hand over the spot on the side; and then take water cauterized and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient endure the pain of the bite and the tightening—because that atrophy bite is like fire—until the bite ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand from the instrument and remove the cauterized water from all around the side with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the tightened bite fades, and leave it for some days, after which the redness will disappear; this is called derier in jouvament.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a poultice in it containing water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of applying water externally, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for the extinguished caustic, each part one, and three times less of the other, mix them in a new vessel in which one part is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of another vessel under the perforated one, and let the liquid slowly pass over the alkali and live caustic in such a way that it collects them for about an inch, and then remove those with your hand by good compression, leaving the liquid that flows from the sharp water in the part left to the non-perforated vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that liquid, and pour the remainder over another live caustic and new alkali, for which this will be of much greater acuity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines, when they are to be cauterized wide, thus with terebinth and honey, and I advise that they be mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts an operation and cure from an ancient man concerning joint pain and sciatic vein pain, and praises the method very much, saying there is no need for any other treatment, and that he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in warm water and cold baths as instructed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if there is no vervain available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be tied with a few grains and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient endures the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in warm water and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that none of these medicines should be treated with a cautery until after the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And I say that when making a cut in the sinewy vein, it will swell more if cauterized; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and over the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And place a cut from dry wool in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it expand.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and continue doing so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for pain in the feet.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two [limbs] is caused by multiple reasons, such as from a wound or striking or excessive evacuation, and other causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery should not be used except in this single case where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, open, and place pills similar to them for the evacuation of the patient over both sides where the pain is three lines according to the width of the area. Then mark with cautery or more wherever there are signs in any line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four cauteries using a medial-pointed cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitulum XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cautery at the Beginning of Gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions observed in this illness among small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulties in eating, elevation, movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	In the lowermost vertebra of the spine and the ribs that are starting to overgrow the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery cover the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then place your hand over the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a manner that cures it and not just alleviates the pain, but heals it with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize the area near the joint of the foot with hot cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive cautery is what it looks like:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend to the toes or other joints, and you notice this, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of the olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery for these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that part but do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the size of a coin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the knee and shin, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the malleoli and is called goutra, then puncture along the circumference of the tendons as they twist, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circumference of the tendons on each finger and over the back of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the elbows.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the malaise properly and with the reception of medicines, then even if good regimen and flame are applied, this cauterization will be in vain, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestines protrude through the opening in front of the abdominal wall, and this begins to close, then when you order the patient to fast on that day and use milder remedies so that the closing opening in their abdomen does not reopen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient's hand over their abdomen, and command them to keep it there until the swelling goes down or the abdominal wall or intestines become apparent.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return those tied hands and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is well heated and begins to spark.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and there where you can find the bone of the shin in the middle of the calf; and repeat this with another pass if you did not succeed in the first pass through the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the pulse of the patient during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine, lest it lead to death or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be mindful that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this would interfere with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the cautery for three days, keeping between that the wound from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that the nourishment is withheld according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out through great efforts to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to lift after 10 days, properly apply a liniment, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him rest and replenish his food and drink, and use strong voices, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely, he will recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity. This is what is exsucked from the cord similarly to the tender part of it; then care for that area as we have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have said that a rupture should be sealed with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with thread:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed for the width in the wounds first over the rupture, and another above it; then your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery for the tornio.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in certain members persists after compression or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its nature and depth, as well as the location of the tornio and the pain associated with it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the wound heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, those pains are punctured in a neighboring member to the affected one, so that you may achieve the desired healing through the cautery while the patient recovers.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, and more frequently when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and affects only part of the body as we described in the division, neither here nor there, and fear that the corruption may encompass his entire body and all its composition; then cauterize that area on the head with five cautery marks: one in the middle of the head, leave the second space from it, extend the forehead to the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with the cautery a little inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, and thus the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; cauterize on the cheek according to necessity.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already spread over the thigh and clearly manifest, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the end of the nose, and two cauterizations on both malleoli, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the scapula, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the kneecaps, and one on each kneecap, and two on the thighs, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their foot; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the hand and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the bones of their shins.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterizer on the os of the pentenilh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limb and joints according to how it is preceded by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And place the cautery in flour mixed with honey and other cure inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for numbing.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that ointment inside as it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which affects the most parts and the feet, and the spine of both sides, and the vision of the nerves which go to that member, and the stupor is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this except those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are morphia.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and you do not apply any of the medical ointments to them, then cauterize over that area with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the cochenille powder until the whiteness and color of the ulcer change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that ointment with powder of err (likely a typo or term for a specific ingredient) and lentils in olive oil and leaves of arnica, and the juice of dove or the juice of yarrow, taking a part of each and mixing them all together. Then place a cloth over the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the thigh.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it is rotated.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery it in the circuit of it with a circle as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for carbuncles.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some carbuncles are delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as he may be old and weak, have few humors, or it may be due to time; if you want to hasten the maturation of carbuncles; then cautery it with several small puncturing cauteries in its circuit; and leave the one that will mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the area until the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, do so to ease the pain in the arm; and then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where a fire-cautery is applied, then heat the cautery with several small and large flames as appropriate for that location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that completely until you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And for three days let that be, and place a hot cautery on the areas previously treated until all the sores are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And for that cure the flesh producing sores with ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeatedly apply the cautery to the areas that are decayed and corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And after medicating with some applications of sharp medicine, which is half the use of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless, a cautery with fire is more beneficial for gentle healing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already explained the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Ulcers and Other Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Moles viewed in the spaces at the bottom of the patient's foot where pain is felt, which is called clau, and this is a large cause, infiltrated, which affects the foot; and for the cautery there are two ways, one is a hot cautery and another is a water-cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The hot cautery is when you heat the concave probe resembling a hook, which is made of iron according to the quantity it contains for all parts, and should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that ignited object on the clau, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the clau so that the cautery reaches the depth of the clau.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it remain there for three days until it begins to scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster with wild nettle leaves salted, and let the plaster remain on it for one night until the clau is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If so non-converting, and motes viewed occurring in the surface of the body, mostly in the thighs and feet, then you administer in those areas with water cautery, and you take a quannula of elm or iron or pinewood, place that over the nail; then put in the quannula of water a small quantity, retract your hand, and you revolve that by compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the canula on the root of the nail, and you will find the water flows through the hole of the nail; wait the patient a little for the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then remove that, for the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same to those and nearby where you come over all of which they have in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When an earthquake-like tremor occurs due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize that area with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and place one cautery on the foot, and one over his stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the healing of the illness is completed.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are gashed wounds and pus-filled cavities formed by corrupt materials; then at the beginning as they appear, the wound should be cauterized over its entire length with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with a stick from oak bark; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not being creased, and when the superfluous matter is ruptured, they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, I must ensure that this is done near the evacuation with flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery treatment for flux from an accident due to an arterial incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often times, flux from an arterial incision that occurs due to the wound which penetrates deeply, or due to the incision of an abscess or cautery of the member, then appears, and it is difficult to remedy that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, when such a case occurs, you hold your hand over the orifices of the artery, and place it there firmly to strengthen those same points for several minutes until the flux of the blood has subsided, then remove it, and let it not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the large and small olive cautery sticks in the fire for a few moments, by number of times, and blow on them until they are heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large cautery stick according to the location and area where the artery is ruptured, place it over that vein vigorously after you have heated your own as instructed, and hold the cautery so that it narrows and restrains the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you heat your own as instructed and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery prepared from those that are in the fire, and continue to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, if it is not possible to restrict the bleeding with a cautery as we have said, then especially when the artery is large, you must use one of four methods: either with the cautery as we have described, or with extraction when it is not extracted, in which case when it is extracted, the ends of the artery are cauterized and the bleeding is restricted, or with lixiviation using vinegar or with astringent substances whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; they should be strong and bound with a pulvinar for proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More than that, he who administers restriction decently to the limb and by constriction with cloths or by position of causes burning and similar, will not fare well.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	More if this should happen to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open gently with the finger indicated over the orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the wound has been left from the upper part of the swelling, and over the arch let the finger not be removed; and over the arch let water fregid (strongly cooled) be sprinkled after the wound is closed and swollen; and more often anoint with cauterization or with medicine as necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and venous punctures and of bloodletting and of wounds and of their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those of the forms of cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved, regarding what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, heed, sons, that in this chapter, we treat of what is caused by fear as mentioned in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And heed, that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, multiple instances of evacuation are necessary. If the condition involves life-threatening issues, you should apply the venesection from the vein, or incise over the abscess or puncture for drainage or purgation of the wound, or extract an arrow and incise the boil, as well as similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you that this applies to you in the situation, for at times, mishandling such matters can lead to patient complications or illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some you will visit and they are sick but light of death, and thus for the vehemence of what he finds of their illness, and for the length of their illness, and in the illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those, some give their name and say, you hope for that health, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should consent to the one who comes to you of which this is the manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and to which by succession commendable success may come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients by prognosis and indication of which health is converted, for in that you have help in the acquisition of fame and memory, of commendation and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God inspires His own understanding in you and does not take away your direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing it into chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cauteries, for the cure from head to feet, so that you may be eased by what you ask about and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head during nursing.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appears for a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I see this illness only in children; and in all of those whom I have seen, it leads to death, and thus it is left to me to work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head was always swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and more so because the moisture increased within as death approached.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the ligament and the bone, or is added by placing the bone on the cushion.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And if the operation in that case where the humidity is between the ligament and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a slit in the middle of the location on the side, and let the length of the slit be about two finger breadths so that the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here you should make two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the wound open from all sides and the water oozes out when you press it with your hand at the inner parts, and this is not what you expected.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And you should make three slits in the middle of the location on the side in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And remove all the humidity by the incision; and strengthen the slits with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it with wine; and later remove the bandage and heal the wound with lint and ointments, strengthening the ligament with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incising, which consideras concerning the size of the abscess and the collection of the water, for in some occasions it may be more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling of the water appear, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and strive for flows of blood and let gangrene proceed through this flow of blood by evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hemorrhages.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When we encounter a catarrh or wound in the ear or foot, it is customary to treat this, and you should not rely on the cure of medicines for it; rather, the proper treatment involves incising these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise where the illness reaches its head, then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tightly wrap the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is in the vein; and the places over which these are close to the temples pressing, and they are hidden for many people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And tightly hold over the artery with your hand, and incise each one with a sharp blade along the path leading to the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the blade to cut the artery and transect it at the incisions above its parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which flows out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear in the incision, then measure from the temple the width of three digits, and hold tightly with your hand, and make the incision into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pound, and more or less it flows out of it, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the fullness of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of infection remains over the bone, then incise this so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and pieces of linen, and place them inside to keep it clean while healing.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute migraine occurs due to humid climates and the quality of the air in the temples, or is a strong old condition similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if this does not provide relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is concealed except in a few men through the force of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is concealed, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum from which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you insert the needle there easily until you reach the artery; and then get oil in it and extract that into the upper parts while you remove this from the codena and discover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is fine, then enclose it at the extremity of the oncii, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are long and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the vein one. into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations using a double strong ligature or long cords, and do not tie it off until after the consolidation of the wound to ensure a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or soon after another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery where the incisions are made, and it will serve in place of that metal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this work if the patient has fever or is from a chill complication; for a cautery helps with the final humidities, and therefore it is better in recovery.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then you should ligate the arteries that you have placed at the proper location, and tie them off above the dust properly made, and soon after apply a cure with dry medicines to cause flesh to grow and with ointments until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during another operation there is a flow of blood from the artery, then you should restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or by filling the place with cotton, and strongly hold your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of this is not at your present, then hold your hand on the place until the bleeding congeals, and pour water of strong coldness on it until the sharpness subsides, and strengthen it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And for this lighter case in the extraction of an artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery, having two scissors ready, after you have marked the two places with your fingers. Hold some ignited material between your hands until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the ends of the vein can be lengthened, which are not completely cauterized by all of this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two scissors must be checked.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the acute pain is like that of two knives, it is better, for if such sharp pains approach each part quickly, and you do not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then, since there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire at those places and the flesh is incised lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more light.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space be which is between two knives the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	For the cure of bodies with sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are on the temples of the head throb and do not offer any cause for the cure from medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a walking sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the eyes become weak, mucusy as if the skins have been worn thin, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, they apply antiseptic remedies in the cure of those from this operation, and name that cure "spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to pull back the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjust.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them where the bleeding stops.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cavity which is above the bone, and then do so for the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then incise this space and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a cuttelet, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then place the blade of the sharp instrument against the adjacent flesh, cut the tissue inside the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle crack, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do so in the middle crack between the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the bleeding has equalized, squeeze the areas of the feet where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand over any gouty crack in the old skin, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and hope that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of warm orboce water, and then cure what with an ointment of basilicum in olive oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of catarrh and secretions from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute catarrh that continues, and the secretions from the feet are reduced and weak, and their appearance shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of their condition the skin, and in the forehead there is a sharp pain and intense swelling as a consequence, you can see from these symptoms that the matter and catarrh do not come from veins within the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in such cases is this: command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small crack along the middle of the forehead, about the width (beginning from the left temple between the right temple; and make the incision into the bone; and extend your hand over the temples which are painful you should cut deeply), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the crack with a piece of old cloth or a cloth strip.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen it further with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not develop into an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the abscess has diminished, then rub the bone where the new flesh begins to form, and then cure that part with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to mature, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a paste and apply it to these wounds of the flesh's origin.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for what attacks the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that attacks the ears is of four species: either it is mineral grit or a cause similar to grit, such as iron or sand, or it is from a plant, such as cypress or fennel, or it is a fluxible cause, such as water or wine and their like, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when gray hair appears in the ear or another cause resembling those causes that do not grow or thrive in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the gray hair, then it distills in some cause of olive oil or sesame, then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where spots have appeared as a result of these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not cured, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, the form of which is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is cured with the gesti, well and good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with a fine subtil onion of small duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of reed and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it is not too tight but only the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not successfully reduced in this manner, then take a hot flannel or a previously prepared pad on which the thighs are placed a quantity of ice, place that at the extremity of the thigh, and then wrap about that adequately.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the tragus of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so, if it is not successfully reduced by all the causes we have recounted, then you cut to drain that which will develop into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that you begin by incising the malade of the phlebetic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, then make a slice between your thumbs and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the back of the ear and draw out its grease into the well-compressed spot.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack has a lunar shape and reaches the heel, and the heel is rotten, block it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, when treating the crack at that time, do so with urgency, and cure it while it is still fresh.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lies in the ear, being one of the waxes that collect and swell, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your attention, then take thin subtle spatum according to this form.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer the extraction of that wax which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, but place it on fine wicks, and during extraction use either gentle gestures or a incision as we have described, for this alleviates the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear canal where the patient frequently sneezes at the onset of illness, and fills their ear with some old wax, place a hot piece of cloth over that ear containing the water. If this is done effectively, it is good; but if not, then take pieces of flax or linen according to the length of the finger, and heat them in the fire for a little while. The patient should insert one of these into their ear canal and shake out a small part of it onto a separate piece of that material and strike it against another stone above the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying the compress until all the water has been absorbed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been completely absorbed, take a piece of paper or cloth, put one end in the ear, and extend the other end into the fire until the material is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another piece of cloth and do this several times until all the water has been absorbed, then squeeze it with an aspirator as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a small object entering that ear, do it more gently and carefully, treating it as we have previously described. But if it is a large object causing immediate symptoms, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, as the cause is less severe than other causes found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have described in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem to be effective, then look into the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if there appears any cause of worms, then extract that with grippers or fine forceps, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and open it wide from above; this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck it out forcefully with suction, performing this several times until all the worms are evacuated.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if it does not obey to your aspiration, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your aspiration be with which you will infuse medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, straight, with a small hole, and a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus they should push so that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the catheter — which is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand on that with a gentle compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of ear abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants suffer from abscesses in the flesh of their ears due to their parents not piercing them, and this occurs in some adults as well. An abscess in the ear flesh can be caused by an infection or lack thereof; sometimes such abscesses form near the opening of the ear canal without causing immediate symptoms, and at other times they occur in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the groin, which does not affect the appearance, is in the major disposition of difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see the swelling, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is apparent swelling, open that small abscess from which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the abscess where it has little width, one part being acute and the other not; and the pus is of two lion's teeth sizes so that it does not irritate the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to hidden flesh in the ear or on the body, then you have those small sharp lancets and incise there with great facility until all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the groin of the ear, then take a small lion's tooth and heat that needle slightly with fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you sense an abundance in that which the patient experiences with ease, due to the heaviness of rising up, relieve the oppression with ease; and be sure not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cloth on the ear according to the amount of the swelling which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the abscess; or that you inject it with a syringe and sprinkle it with dried trisast powder, using it. And if you see the ear already protruding, then extract what you have damaged and replace it with another liquid which you wrap in lint soaked in olive oil, until the abscess is drained; and cure it as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if a hemorrhage occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out, and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of athetosis which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athetosis which affects the eyelids sometimes is moist, at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then take those emplasters or ointments, and apply them to the sores of their rash, and place your hand over the areas treated.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of scalding blood, then apply the cautery to those areas with a thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is applied near the incisions, and the sores return only when there remains any cause of their rash; and when they are cauterized with fire, those sores are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of hives that affect the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Motes viewed often in the eyelids of the heels due to some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and because of this size it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of coarse humidity in the eyelid, below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So the operation in them is to consider whether the swelling originates from within, coming out of the eyelid and affecting all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So make a slit there for the width, and then open that from all parts with ease as it evacuates, and suspend that and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not find the beginning of it and instead have to penetrate the eyelid with a small incision gradually, then do so without any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the eyelid is prolapsed to the inner parts of the eyelid margin, lift the inner surface, then turn back the eyelid and suspend the prolapsed part with a needle, starting from the outside, pressing it from all sides, and if the eyelid by itself becomes stretched, this we do not notice for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and dress the area with a solution that should be healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the treatment of an eyelid wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is gray matter that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates the wounds of those affected and causes death through their catarrh; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun for this reason, and tears congregate in those areas.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason, they often have them weep on their cheeks all the time, and they sleep with tears on their cheeks; only on the eyelids of their tears are the brows wet, which already show inflammation and the apparent imminent occurrence of axcirnath in the wound; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you can feel the axcirnath between them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that the patient pauses his head on your knee, and places a cloth between him and you to act as padding, and makes it into a circle according to the quantity which contains arthnach from all parts, and places this over that and presses on the knees called from all parts so that it may be added arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then in the middle of that moisture lets an incision descend by breadth, and the fissure not be greater than the fissure made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding cavity where you make the opening totally until you perceive arthnach, for in the more depressed areas process arthnach by fissure according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract those cloths from the knees which you have wrapped around the parts outside and mix between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not press on the fissure so that you do not obstruct the moisture and let it flow.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if it does not appear in your alternative at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust a small piece of facilitation between the alternations; then extract that as we have said; and submerge cloths in wine and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in that area, then cure it with flaxen plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the ways of touching all.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye, the natural skin is pressed and becomes old, then those nobles of the eye and make it become ways of maladies such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and tissue that causes destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: either with a cautery by fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said earlier in the Capitol of cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or with cantharides as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus ensure that you place the head of the patient on your right hand; then turn the eyelid of the elder with your left hand, and if it turns, good; but if not, insert a needle into that where the thread is tied for the cut, then let go of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the thread above, and this should be—near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises—the skin, and pull the thread upwards above the eyelid, and turn it.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then cut inside the eyelid, adjusting the skin against the tears from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal; then extract the thread and place fine powder of coto or cloth over the eyelid, and cover it with a tent, as shown in the figure of a mirt leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Nevertheless, ensure that the figure is according to the amount of levation of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those among them you need to cut a significant amount from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make the incision along the two lines you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal gland between the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin lines, such as the width of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and scrape that area completely, then suture the two edges with a needle or fine wool thread, and clean the wound, and apply the excess thread on two sutures for some viscous conditions, if you want to do this, otherwise, you do not need to treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the thread sutures remain for three to four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound dry and heal on its own, treating it with something that dries and constricts. For an elevated eyelid, you should apply the dressing of the wound and the addition to it; sutures are better. Therefore do this as instructed by the ancients.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if it is necessary concerning the patient, and is of good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of applying it is that the leaf of the laurel figures as a leaf, and then lift the eyelid by three hooks arranged and gathered in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, take the hooks, and since this is unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads equally, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, lift the entire codena over which it is placed as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, stitch that abscess with thread and match it in appearance, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes over the eyelid that your skin be converted, then use there what we said about incision; but suture in those places where it is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat the canna (likely referring to a joint or limb) in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and incise the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two canna or two thin astelas whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width be one third of the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some thinness over what you have excised from the eyelid of the whole, and tighten the canna of each part with strong tension, and leave it for a few days; so that the bond due to the tension will die and be rejected, and will fall off as it does by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not punctured.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method for two canes which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of punctured skin on the heel, use an awl when the skin is tense.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins on the heels, for the operation, you should use a thin awl and place it in that fine fiber of the skin. Then, carefully adjust the ends of the thread in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the fibers should be the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another fine cloth and place it briefly, using the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a towel, and close to the sun so that your work is revealed, as it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the cut in the tight cloth that has been adjusted with forceps, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid between the time you withdraw it from the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upwards and insert it into the incision, ensuring there are one or two or three pieces of skin and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand there so that the skin is flapped out into the incision in the eyelid with alcohol on the eyelid and the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	More if the skin is flapped with alcohol and not moved out, pull the alcohol-laden incision cloth to the parts leaving it on the fine cloth you have prepared, so that in this way alcohol from the wound will remain.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And while holding the view of the wound, you will then fix the ligament, stitch each part and close the wound, and let it remain closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, elevate it at that place, or let it remain until it stretches somewhat over the space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of the swelling that appears in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is swelling in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that contracts toward the top, or to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the wound, section, or cautery, it is called leporina. This swelling can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of the wound, sections, or cauteries, or resembling them in its effects.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation in him be that you make that consolidation and separate his labia and place in him at what is between those a mechanical strip of cloth and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And ensure that you use the cure for him from the causes which dry up, compress; for if you do this it will return to gout worse than ever without any time having passed.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it has been boiled and its seeds, or ointment of yarrow, which is liquefied by some of the oils, and submerge the mechanical strip in that, and apply it there.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with any tool that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of gout that does not return the form of the area according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of an extraction performed on the eyelid, let this be known.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This extraction performed on the eyelid is known as an ophthalemic extraction; it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More often it is caused by a wound, a cut, or a cautery, or other similar reasons.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for the operation is to take a needle and make a double thread, placing that needle in the flesh, and making it pass from the left lacrimal duct to the right lacrimal duct, ensuring that the thread reaches both ends of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the tissue at the upper parts near the needle and sew that with the needle, making an incision with a wide blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good; otherwise, take a ray and place that in the split figure, then convert the eyelid with that, and make the two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two cracks at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, are to be treated by making an angle between them so that when they come together a figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then close the flesh there with the amount that is the length of the sharp point left from it, which serves as a stitch.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with the silk thread; and apply those treated with what we have said about the softening medicines and ointments until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then apply the ointment between two folds as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on incising when above or left behind, let it flow in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that is in the form of varied spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise craftsmen at all times prepare means in every manner which is possible for him to return the figure to the natural form or near that, and that malady according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in a man's eyelid, one should try to solidify the eyelid above by fixing it to the tarsus, prohibiting its ease of movement and the natural functions. Therefore, you should insert the outer corner of the ray, place the eyelid within, and elevate or extend it to that side.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a thin blade, which should not be of acute incisions, having an obtuse small opening so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the fluid to maintain its acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it facilitates the separation of the adhesion so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the wound enough salt water to wash with; or distill it from zinc dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a cloth. Place over the wound infused wool in cow's milk, and for several days use conservative treatments until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the orbital flesh.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, resembling a thin hard thread; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it can be divided, and the incision should not be too deep.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not start until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of water.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of acting in the incision of the eye is that the patient keeps his head in your lap, and then open the eyelids, and lift up the upper eyelid with your hand, and collect the eyeball with one finger and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or a bull or a cow, or from a sheep, or from strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the eyelid with thread; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the secretion from the eyelid which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that under the skin into the inner part of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the conjunctiva at the edge of the lacrimal gland with a thin spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that by this incision it does not develop continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is placed on the sole of the extended foot or on pitch, as we have said, and then it is excised with lion's tooth, which is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the lion's tooth you do not touch the clear coat, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then sprinkle a little saline or cerate of lead on the wound, and leave it in for another day; and take care that what goes inside heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, then use this kind of treated nail to be cured with medicines, and it is healed as I have described in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the space in the thigh and use a fine lion's tooth cauterized according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarified and confined within the tissues, then spit into the hand of chafed cloth or of roasted cloth or of salted cloth, and apply the hand to the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation over it until everything from there is removed, but if contrary pus forms in the hand, then leave that and cure the beginning of the pus until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation over it until it is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The gland of the tear duct, if noticed in the hand causing great discomfort, should be suspended by a needle; and incise that part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then spit into the tear duct a handkerchief of chafed cloth or of soaked cloth until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	From the incision of gualardenic and of what is born from flesh pressed in the whole.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In the heels of some, flesh has grown rogue, and is pressed over covering the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids and lightly compresses the eyelids at the outer parts and is assembled to the edge of the balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More so, the operation in it is that the patient lies on his side; and then opens the heels of that one and collects all that flesh with convenient incisions, and has it with forceps or with tongs; and then incises the flesh at the beginning as long as everything is finished with the scalpel, and guard well from the heel that you must not lose any part for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be along the one you made on the side or on the back where we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small pincers through which the flesh is removed according to the form that will come in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is cauterized, fill the wound with salted brine, or distill into it rogue powder resembling those corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally as on a piece of cloth until it is secured against an abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of swelling and suppuration is suspected, and you fear an abscess, then let the whole and cure that abscess with what will yield that abscess, and place it over that again in operation until it is healed, and similarly do on the flesh adjusted which you have encountered in the healing of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must know that all healing of swelling by natural means or by accident is achieved through iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the limb is suffering from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of knowledge regarding swelling.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge is that veins should be sought which are rough on the swelling and to prohibit their operation, as they will increase the swelling over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the swelling in which knowledge is sought is strong and if there is no other illness present, then you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads, in subtlety, and wipe the scab hour by hour, while encouraging those veins to swell and be rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be sure that you do not apply heat to the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, then remain firm in your operation and do not go beyond those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the scab verdant vinegar or wine so that with its heat it corrupts what is swollen from the gout.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Moreover, if this is not possible for you at that time, then plaster everything with what relieves the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is subdued and an abscess is assured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to how the patient handles it as they are cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	For the reduction of dislocated bones in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat dislocated bones in the nose with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of the case precedes and it is not healed, then do not engender anything in it but make incisions over the abscess and allow it to mature. And extract all the moisture which is in it until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, you must treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "sharp head," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, like holding the one which is made with points through file work or delicately pierced (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place him over the decayed part of the bone, and then rotate that area between your fingers, and press your hand little by little making sure you know that that decay is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive factors.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the healthy tissue is separated from the diseased part and it remains clean for 40 days, and does not become inflamed or infected and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you uncover either the bone with forceps or with sharp instruments, and once the bone is uncovered, then take hold as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be slightly narrowed towards the tip as you can see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it over the bone, which is near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little forward, and then rotate your hand within the forceps to penetrate the entire bone, and the pain felt by the patient indicates that the forceps have entered properly.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with drying styptic medicines as they are accustomed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and the area are hardened, the material which was infiltrating into the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the patient, subsequently apply gentle scarification and suction on the neck six times, and then place a liniment made of acacia, aloes, oaks, and gum arabic. Finally, firmly apply the plaster with powder on the hernia.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of applying the powders is that you take linens soaked with powder, and each linen should be folded into four parts; then use those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those over each other according to the quantity that it has of the whole necessity.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen the bandage with a hard knot; and repeat the cups with suction several times; and after place the cups and leave them tight all day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then make it tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the ligament tightly during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the knot and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol.xxI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal membrane, and then this prominence protrudes and processes outward like a degree of retraction, and its form resembles that of a person. If you wish to incise this, then the operation on it is as we have recommended. You should insert the needle into the slit of the uveal membrane from the part left in the upper part, and then place another needle with a double thread from the part of the lacrimal gland, making the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle according to its position; then incise the location of the double thread and lift the part of the uveal membrane around the needle's circuit, and strengthen this area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place yourself over the heap of infused wool in honey and let the thread remain in the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the heap with what will comfort that which the wound has healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth at the center of the heap, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes to the core of the heap, allowing the humid matter to drain and descend, and exit quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it while it has healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcers is nothing but putrefaction which settles in the wound like water flowing down and is not the other.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to position the ulcer on a prepared and straight surface, then hold its edge with your fingers in two parts, and move it where you see the putrefaction reach the parts left, then dry it so that it does not descend, and let the light be, as the ulcer will show the causes thus as you can see.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent to the wound is not prepared as we have said, then make the surgeon sit between your hands and approach taking a thin spatula and place it over the panniculus, circulating a little of the conjunctiva onto the cornea in the socket (into the site of the wound), ensuring that the wound is cleansed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And since it is cleansed, then you drip in the good water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol. xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure for water descending into the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is suitable to puncture when speaking, according to its nature.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	When you must separate the patient's thighs on your knees over a cushion and tie it firmly in place.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the corner of his eye where the water is; or with your right hand if the water is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the basin, if the water is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the water is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the basin near the crown due to the size of the infant in the water at the corner of the eye from the lower eyelid, and then press the basin with virtue and turn your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the basin is already permeated due to virtue.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And you must ensure that the depth of the basin is appropriate when pressing, so that it matches the space between the pupil and the edge of the dark part; which is the corner of the eye. You will then see the pupil clearly through the clarity of the corneal membrane with the vision of the eye.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand in the spot where the water is, and then you draw it down one time and another, and therefore if the water descends quickly, then see the patient there where his sight falls upon quickly, and hold your hand in its proper place.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you draw it down another time in front that the hand be not thrown off.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and turn your hand a little by little, and then dissolve a bit of clear gemstone salt in the water and use that to wash the place inside; then return the liquid completely, stopper or infused wool in olive oil and album of egg and bind it with that the liquid remains.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Moreover, we and those of our time bind it with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your hand does not obey to the instrument of the liquid due to its hardness — which is common in some men whose skin is very hard —, then take the spittle which is named albedine, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small incision in the locus.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the probe as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to sleep in a dark house where he lies on his back, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the wound to allow its natural healing, and do not disturb his head towards the right or left side entirely.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the suture be according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then take the patient out of that dark house and expose him to fresh air, and make the wound heal by some causes, and then return the suture on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not make this at the time of the cure or shortly after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having a cavity that you separate there so that water may pass freely by great and violent effort.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if a boil occurs, having a cavity that you open on the seventh day, and correct that amount which yields to the boil.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you have completed the wound and place your hand on the face of the wound orally, for which it may heal, leave it for a few days, allowing it to remain in the more shady area.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually let it heal and change in its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is permissible for the apprentice to have a few views, and then you shall be attentive to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already been cured of some of those which are in the Artach, and some say to make fire in the Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is drained.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But, however, we have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it be about those who ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their ends are to this subtlety triangular, the acute end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	For the healing of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise various hidden flesh masses, from which arises some cause that is combined with a scorpion of heavy weight or with a polyp of this kind; and this illness is called polypus, which is similar to that kind of polyp represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And the flesh is carcinous, dark in color; and from it comes the flesh like a lion's, not dark in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh masses neither fraudulent nor carcinous, make the wound heal between your fingers and expose it to the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and apply a mixture of honey in those flesh masses.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the incisions outward, and divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you know all the flesh has been separated; if any remains due to some cause of which the separation is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its division for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the wound is infected or an abscess has formed, then pause at that which is covered; or if it is a malignant abscess, then incise and cauterize it, ensuring that the abscess is divided and all the cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then insert in the nose near the incision either some water or wool.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is no pus but only bones of the nose to which the incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	When you find that an object has entered the body of someone who has a lump, use needles on it, and place the quantity of a finger or less between each needle, and extract the evil by inserting an end of the cord into the nostril with force or for some other reason which is possible to do.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, let its odor enter before it reaches the nasal passages, and sit over his bowel, for too many children at schools laugh at this action, and it is a light matter for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the cord, one that hangs over the nose and the other that enters into the nose, and then apply a ligature of flesh around the needles in the cord, and do this before you can feel that the flesh is around the needles of the cord.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the cord, and place a plug in the nose near the opening of the nostril with a wick, and do this for three days or more until the salve dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you need to induce sweating for cure, use of that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal drops in which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for making nasal drops flat and open; to this, attach a handle at the rear end, with which you will hold it when you heat oil or water from the glands and causes that are sucbiblable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal probes are precious: recipe of castor oil, of white balata, of galingale, of saffron powder, of long pepper, of asafetida, of one ounce of cinnamon juice, and of wheat and caulis juices, and make pills from them, and cool one pill in clear water, and give it to the patient through the nostrils while he is asleep.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the lips to the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Pimples appear on the lips and at the ends of the nose, and they become prominent and are palpable within a few days as the swelling is noticeable upon examination.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should intervene at the beginning of its appearance, and extract all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a cauterizing instrument or medicine over the area where it was located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the extraction is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider whether it is ripe, hard, of dark color, and has little sensation. In such cases, do not touch that with a needle as it is a dangerous abscess; for pimples should be extracted to prevent such great harm to the surrounding area.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not of a dark color, and if complete extraction is possible throughout, then drain the poison and extract it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by wound or by similar injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much trust in that operation but rather in several skilled surgeons.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when it comes to any of these causes, consider whether the wound is fresh or has begun to heal. Then, adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound where continuity is dissolved are already separated, and each part is made healthy, then you should remove each part from its apparent edge until it begins to scab.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them. Over them, sprinkle healing dragon's blood powder and spread three layers of transparent paste or some other consolidating plaster. Let this mixture remain for two to three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster, allowing the wounds to heal until the threads are absorbed on their own. Continue to treat with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are told to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	For the extraction of those causes that venous problems occur in the two lips within the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spots appear within the internal parts of their lips, causing hard abscesses similar to lard. Some are small and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, carefully incise all parts of the lips and the cavities of each hardness, and then fill the wound with three layers of cloth while the wound is constricted, and subsequently wash it with wine and treat the area with water that has a收敛作用，直至愈合。
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	For the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care should be taken over the gums of flesh-bound which the ancients called albulus, then cut that gum where you have it bound with a thread or where you hold it tightly with forceps and incise there its reason, and let the healthy blood flow out or the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something warm on the area for three days or another stimulating powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise there again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth at the inner parts and those from the outer side, and between the gums, there are sharp edges, cracks, and some times black spots that appear yellowish or greenish, you see through this corruption and the teeth become weak.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And thus, you must cut the patient's thigh and place its head in a basin of water, and rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear with some substance so that no part breaks due to any cause, and do this for the blackness and the yellowish color as well as other changes if they have occurred.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if what is in those of the beginning of the reason is good; and otherwise, then you iterate the reason on those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have often required cuts in various forms and of different figures according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, with the razor by which the tooth is cut from the inside, another razor is used by which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors should be prepared by you, and you will see them often.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Choose to cure the tooth of its pain with great care and take your time in the entire extraction, for no cause can substitute the necessity of the cut when it is extracted, for a substance is refined during the process of extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	More carefully choose when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, for firmly you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many cuts relieve the pain and mistakenly involve a healthy tooth, and upon extracting that one, the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this in the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then you must determine which tooth is painful, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with some substance in which there is virtue, within which it is dissolved from the root of the tooth by all parts, and then slowly between those ties or fine scissors at the beginning.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then moisten it well with strong water for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between those ties below that you must hold well to prevent moisture, and then extract the tooth according to straightness in a manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it well on the patient from all sides to facilitate the removal, doing so as it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must completely wrap it with cloth and tie it tightly at the fine end to prevent it from breaking during your manipulation of it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make sure that you operate meticulously around the circuit of all parts of the gums and keep your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the illness because its mischief is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their puncture and audacity regarding the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised; which leads to great illnesses coming upon men, which are harder to treat than a simple boil. The causes of their failures are all, or some of those, or that they extract from certain bones of the mandible as we have testified with many instances.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are discharge of pus for this reason, as many times happens, then take some vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not help, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long and thin, short and thick, so that they do not bend when you have to work.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And thus whenever you use large needles where they are not folded, make them short and pointed.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and pointed at the tip. At the tips of these, there are teeth that interlock and hold firmly by descending construction, and some times the tips are in the shape of a heron's bill, called a ciconia, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of fractured jaw bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured by some cause, first ensure that you apply pressure firmly over the area for one or two days until the location becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs whose tips are shaped like the bill of a heron (called ciconia or guanta), and have strong construction:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of the forceps should be made inside like a file orawl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not obey, then open the wound over the rectum and separate all the flesh and insert the instrument which is named atrial, that is a small lever of which the shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be briefly that the large end is small, and not bent so that it does not get stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the rectum is perforated, that is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular-ended, in which there is some swelling:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form in the next line:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which will be used for rasuring teeth; since this instrument is made for the youth, which resembles a large钳子，其形状如下所示：
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity that is twisted or bent, which is some kind of swelling, and not engorged so as not to be taut.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another note that the tooth instruments are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves methods according to what the operation and various ailments signify to them; for there are ailments to which the ancients would neither refer nor use a specific instrument due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth is tauten, or if it breaks, then place weight on that area at what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and the help to do this is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some small swelling gradually, and it should be pressed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee while the bone is completely drilled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a small ulcer, first remove that ulcer and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural order, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it cannot be separated or removed with a file, then extract that tooth. But if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut out that tooth using an instrument whose shape is like the head of a pig, made of steel from India with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your cut be such that you extract that tooth in multiple days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be any different from other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominent and needs to be filed, then file that tooth with a steel file from India, whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it is all made of iron from India and the margin edges; and it is of small wooden points thus as with a file on which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over days for ease, so that there is no other sharp tooth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then mark that one at the end, and shave that one with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and the tongue lides over it, then you should file that part so that the sharp edge of that fracture is hindered and equalized, and made full so that the tongue does not cut it nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth are affected by concussion or removal due to impact or a fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over what is missing, and you have treated this with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong use gold foil rather than silver, because silver becomes loose and may come out in a few days, but gold does not change at all.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the bile be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the bile and hold twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and nearly when it grows into two twists of the bile between two molar teeth, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then push the tissue into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not mangled.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your compression be such that you hold the bile tightly without letting it escape from the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the excess parts of the bile with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And let it remain thus stretched like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen it or them with another ligament in such manner throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these bindings:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the mouth, and they have grown back as we have described, and they are replaced.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by anyone other than skilled artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol. xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament where it is in the language and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves a mark on the tongue for some days or is natural to it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one lifts the mouth of the patient, their existing head in the lying position; elevates their tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its resting position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or tenacity in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer of flesh, and incise here to avoid a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the wound with wine or vinegar or with hot water; and place a pad on the tongue to keep it moist. If necessary, leave the patient's tongue out at night to prevent it from healing again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, place a vitreous glass over the area; if the blood persists, then cauterize the location with a pointed cautery suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a cyst, use the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, when an abscess in the tongue occurs, prohibit the use of the tongue in its natural operation; and greatly enlarge it until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient sixty degrees facing the sun and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a brown color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, then do not touch that part which is diseased.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, in which there is moisture, then place the probe in it, and incise that with a fine knife, and incise all of it. And if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then cover it with a vitreous glass, so as to restrain the blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it shall be healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of apstema from two ears and those that are located in the cheek, and other apstemas.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I encounter a godata (gland) in the cheek, these are glands that are conglomerated like gout, which occur externally and are named as two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the apstema is hard, of dark color, and of little sensation; do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron to prevent blood flow. First, let it mature, and then either you will incise it or it will rupture on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root is fine, then it is to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on them is that you consider, before your operation, if they have already rested the abscess of their caut fully or if it has diminished somewhat; and then cut the malaise before the sun, their head in your care, and hold their mouth, and the servant holding between his hands the tongue of them takes hold of the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press upon that tongue and show it to the patient, and cut over that with your quick hand, then take an awl and prick that abscess, and pull that outwards as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, except that the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the opposite straight part, and which is sharp, made of iron and bent.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not present, then incise that space from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and near the incision, the malady will be cured by washing with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, cure it with water from the decoction of bark of dog's-bane or of leaves of hound's-tail, resembling those of styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it as it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses appear in the groin or other locales besides the two ears, and incise those according to what is said in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, had already closed her groin, and the woman breathed freely, and had already been forbidden to eat and drink water, and she was nearing death if more water remained for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already been punctured for so long that there were now two fingers' breadth between where it would drain through two incisions.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut open the fistula fully and placed my finger in one of its openings, then pulled that out, taking with it a good portion, and next incised the other opening from which the pus would drain, and compelled its mouth, grasping its tongue, and finally placed my finger in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut out a large part of it, and from that only a little blood was flowing.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the well-being of that woman improved, and she began to drink water, and soon eat food. Therefore, I continued incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which kept forming as long as that condition lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I began to treat and cauterize her well-being, according to the method; and next I wandered about and did not know what God had done for her nearby.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXV.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of gout when it is acute.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarr (catarrah) affects the uvula, and it is enlarged and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and thus often times you know that the abscess has already been cauterized and is subtle, then cut the area that is added round; if it is of the length, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not more than an inch, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear about the gout.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut the gout and press the tongue of it with an instrument from which the shape is derived, and place the ounce in the new, and pull that down and incise the area with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two maces.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover it so that it does not exceed what is fitted over the natural term of addition, for if you exceed it, you will lengthen his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And nearby the insertion, use that which we have mentioned in the insertion of two layers, and ensure that it is healed within.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient is frightened by the insertion, cover it so that you use a soothing agent in the cautery to relieve his fear, and the manner of the cautery on him is simply with hot water. You should place the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as mentioned earlier. Take from the water which we said in the chapter of cautery, and apply it to the wound so that it is alive but not too thin or subtle. Use this to fill the cavity of the instrument whose form this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the end of the cavity in which the medicine is applied be as wide as the mouth of a chisel, and place the instrument over the medicine near the vagina, and the patient should rest on his side so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the internal medicine, so that it does not decrease for any cause on the wound and heals that area.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off over three to four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, reapply it, and after cauterization, cleanse the circuit of the uvula with a soaked cloth, modify that which is in the circuit of the uvula with the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with garum (a fish sauce) until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safe and free from incision and the fear thereof.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some cases of the uvula are cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikados arabicum, camomile, grind them and make paste from their parts, adjust all those causes or some of them into a salve, and let them be submerged in vinegar, and bubble; and the salve should be well kneaded with good plaster, and in the middle of the salve put a wick, over which place an arum root container according to this manner; make it of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity in the mouth of the patient between where the vapor goes to the uvula over the quulta, while the uvula is moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over those cases several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would too much constrict the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather declare the case an abscess with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and bind at its end a piece of hazel, so that the mouth of the patient be opened, because the hazel stopper prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a foreign object or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible. Afterwards, place your finger on the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, so that you may discern what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not obvious and is hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or a razit leaf, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge and soak it well in honey, and force that sponge down, as it will reach the location where the thorns are and be extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside the body and secretly extract it; or take a worm and secretly place it inside and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if not already done according to the causes we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let his head be elevated upwards, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that the doctor places his hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, let the patient himself insert honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause attached and push it downwards, and pull his hand with the instrument towards him, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is fully inserted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	For the extraction of gouty blood from the kidney.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gouty blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the side of the patient's bed in the sunlight, after you have understood the language of the foot with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or through fine, subtle means.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the side of the patient's foot. Then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the side) and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge full of water, squeeze its mouth over the area, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, but wipe the water again on your hand for about an hour, as soon as you feel the gouty blood start to move.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If this has not been previously burned as we have recommended, then fumigate the groin with incense or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall into place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of fumigation is this: you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening, and at the end of the instrument, place the extremity; and then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the groin over the extremity of the cannula, and close its mouth so that the subfumigation is not burned off until you know that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catz, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and abstain the groin from drinking, eating salty causes, and other foods, and do not drink water; thus, this regimen must be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it appears; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And it is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not leak.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the main discussion on abscesses and their treatment is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special lumps, of various kinds, according to their nature, and each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncturing and treating them through two methods. One method is specifically for abscesses themselves; the other is for what is compressed by the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is near the places where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its own judgment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And for abscesses some of which cover areas that should not be perforated but rather allowed to mature until the healing is complete in those areas.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So for other abscesses which must be incised when they are ripe and not matured according to their completion, thus for abscesses that are near joints, when an abscess is near a joint, its nature extends into what is within the circuit of the joint, and corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is an abscess near the main limb, and you delay the incision until it matures naturally in the main limb; or if it is near the anus, therefore incise what is not yet ripe; and should not be cut raw due to poor digestion, but one near the anus, so that it does not become inflamed and extend inward into the parts of the anus, causing a fistula, or done at a time when it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You must know the time for incising the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and then the decrease in redness and pulse, and the subsiding sharpness at the head of the boil, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know when to puncture the abscess in the location near it and allow the pus from the swelling to drain.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncturing should be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or foot, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in flesh, it is better to delay the puncturing until the digestion of it is confirmed according to complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it too soon, it will prolong the course of the pus and misthick the walls of it so they become more hardened and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or body if necessary, or according to that from which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that you administer a small perforation in large abscesses, or a large and wide opening or multiple sections according to the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done as if with a bandage or string, do it thoroughly, just as you would in cases of tumors and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which the incision is made as the figure of a mint leaf, as with abscesses of phlyax.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More so for those in which no such thing is done, as with superficial abscesses of lions, ensure that you perforate them with a superficial or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected much healthy pus, that you puncture it and do not hesitate to extract all the purulent matter at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day incise the abscess further, extracting a larger portion, and proceed in this manner making punctures according to degree until it is fully evacuated.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of strong virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit has resolved into the exit of the healthy matter, and greatly alleviates the illness, and you may openly perform.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you perform your puncture on these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or if it forms a flat section. Then administer either hot or cold applications accordingly; if the abscess is large and the openings from the puncture are painful, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have separated a part of the cord or have concave it in the circuit, then you should close it with cold flax or with a thread made of linen cloth, just as when you have drawn out blood or roots, to maintain their humidity; strengthen it on the seventh day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if you should happen to have a flow of blood during the hour of your operation, then administer water infused with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should infuse powders with wine and oil, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders infused in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this be steeped for three days, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it whatever is appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses in what manner the cure of each one is treated individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the chain of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the chain of the head, small abscesses occur, and these contain nodules which are formed by their own tissues; the nature of these nodules is spotted.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are lumps, and among them are those that contain humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and among them are those that are hard and calcified.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there should be no fear, just as you should not fear the extraction of those without.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for the section of these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called a lancet, until you know it contains pus.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what it contains is humidity, then section that along its length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line B. into the line G. As the moisture is evacuated, then you scratch that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it all, for if many times returns, if it remains of that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it carefully in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with it you will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you feel the need for it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cross-like form, and cut between the two sides of the section, and draw out all parts of it, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery opposes you, then do what I have recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscess incised and for its healing as we have said before; the incision on an incised abscess should be lighter, because it has little bleeding and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people have no moisture at all; the cause is that I cannot incise an abscess on a woman's head. Instead, I must probe it with a hard, rough, and white probe that could not be twisted, and if any part was affected by this, it would be damaged.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other head abscesses, this is not covered in this chapter. Instead, the treatments for abscesses that occur in children's heads and ears should be applied, but the incision of all these should be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the incision of those in the lower parts below the area so that it alleviates the body of the disease to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Signs of suppuration occur in these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the signs that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these arises in its own membrane. Just as with the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are signs. Some of them are lumpy, some contain humidity, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you perceive to have good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is not edematous, cut that one with a superficial dry incision from above the part down to the part below the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, and extend the lips of the skin outward with a scalpel or small cuts if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not cut yourself with your hand in the process, or ease the patient's suffering, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then pause on the affected area with vitriol trissa or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that within which is at rest the acuteness of the apstema and makes the wound softer and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulas, and then incise those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the vein of the scrofula, avoid incising that scrofula from its origin.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you cut where the ligament is strongly folded, leave that [space] so it falls by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old wool which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrofula entirely, then adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no excess tissue remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess tissue due to the size of the scrofula, then understand to incise its edge, remove it, and administer stitches as stated.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing humidity, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and pause the puncturing of what is the pus base beneath the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is rotten from corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of生成中，请稍候...
Capitol .xliii.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of generative flesh within which it should heal.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the blister in the abscess under the sole.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They say that the ancients performed this section of the blister in the epilhit, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Yet in men with stiffness, a cavity should be avoided during the removal of the blister, for if this is not done properly, it could harm all the veins and major arteries of the thigh.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Yet in those who have abscesses on the mouth or sole of the foot or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the blister to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, incise the epilhom, leave three or four small circles of the epilhom's circles, or a quarter section between two circles in quantity, so that the section is chapped, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for the section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of its blood are lifted.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the cord of the gallbladder with forceps, and then cut the cord before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cicatrice as we have instructed; and it is significant about the section of the channel by the flame which is of that eye and of its disordered state and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two ligatures of the wound's cord, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is lacking.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is merely that you may see some of those abscesses have already drained pus, and the patient has come out of danger, with the vein cut off, and some went on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient might breathe over the site of the wound through a single breath, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, I order to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it lasts for three days; and therefore then I order thus the wound, and cure that where it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the patient's wound and incised there a part of the root of the lung, and I was called to treat the patient, and examined the woman as she moaned like one who has died, and uncovered the wound and stopped the bleeding which was coming from the small wound of the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I confess that there was no rupture of vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her with what became healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any physical injury nor even in her voice, and soon returned to her usual state of health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the case of the foreskin, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an apostema that occurs on the shoulder and is called a hernia of the shoulder.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema, named hernia of the shoulder, is a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other resembles an apostema caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not allow him to make presumption as if he were a master only in the one who is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that area and investigate the one he points out. If you find a hard lump, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that area like a node, extract it from the skin and bursicle it; otherwise, you thoroughly examine his entire condition, and place the affected area in such a way as to facilitate healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the sections on the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the joints, there are various species, and I have already described all the species of nodes in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And you must note that I distinguish between nodes and hernias in such a way as to avoid any doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in hernias there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the excess is subsided; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	More often there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that lion's skin which is on the back.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a stain and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that at its beginning from the flesh which is called intermuscular, according to how its form will appear in the caput, which is nearby this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it where the area is most humid, which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little with it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand near the size of the abscess, and extract the inserted flesh and consider what is found in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intruding substance, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if dry on the surface with a section forming a cross as shown:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have shown you, suspend it with a cord, and carefully strip the skin off all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract the clean part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract the clean part, and many clots will remain. Then you extract it in pieces to ensure it does not break for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks for any reason, whether little or too much, the node returns as best as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any part has broken slightly, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, place it over the area where an abscess is suspected, and cure the rest with the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and cure that which is within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then incise and fill the area with one-third zegi (a type of glass) that is vitriol, and let it remain open for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood stops; and then return to dividing what is torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, of lead, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument remains in the abscess.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called Albed, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it consists of three spices, of which one is major, another minor, and the third a small amount.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced minor, is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced small, is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is proper that they be used for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are from the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like large needles to which threads are sewn, and they are made of amber, or of iron, or of silver. The best are those made of amber.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And blackbird experiments are performed, which they say must be open for those in the cavity where their reflections are reflected due to their lightness to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large blackbird experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium blackbird experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small blackbird experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the blackbirds are of three species. Some are simple long ones, which have only one curve, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have curved bodies, which are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those blackbirds having two curves are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them you have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, like this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single moderate curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single slight curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a single very great curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a single moderate curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single slight curve, like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a single great curve having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a single moderate curve having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a single slight curve having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a single great curve having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of an uncia woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of an uncia woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and apothemmas are incised and excised, and they are of three species, one of which is grand, female, and pauc.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the grand scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the female scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the pauc scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those from which section is made are acute, while the others are blunt. They are not kept in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done juvantly (juvente means health or vigour) during the excision of nodes, avoiding the risk of incising a vein or nerve. For these reasons, the condition is cured and there is a little tranquility due to the heat which results from the excision of the apothema.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of algamids, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are made of wool and resemble rays from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is at the outer edge punctured with spatum hidden there, and runs to the inner parts both inside and outside, as you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spathims, which are hidden between the fingers and involve the perforation of abscesses without harming the patients, are of three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vents, in which the flow of blood is cut off, are of three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They should be made of lemon bark, round in shape of some length, and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And ensure that these cups are of different sizes, large, medium, and few, so that through those cutaneous areas the flow of blood can occur with speed in necessity, and when you first apply them there should be no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use them to obstruct the flow of blood throughout the entire body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as the inner sides of the knees and thighs, the armpits, the breasts, the abdomen, and similar fleshy creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes small instruments resembling scissors are made for these purposes; through which the blood is obstructed when performed by venesection, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this manner:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. xlvii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	For the treatment of men's testicles which are swollen.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some of the testicles are swollen in certain men. You should advise them to change their sleeping position, as the testicles begin to become hard. Soon the testicles swell, and the women's testicles, which are similar, also swell.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who have this condition, cut out the affected area according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G. Then remove all the tissue, and fill the wound with red medicine. Next, suture the two sides of the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the testicle droops towards the groin and becomes softened due to its size, as it often does in women, then cut it out into two layers, each section resembling a lunar shape. Each should be contained within the other such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the core which is between the two sides of the wound, and drain the pus. Administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for the treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that should be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until the flesh around the fat is eaten away, and then remove it when it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of carbuncles where pus leaves it titillates.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When carbuncles where pus leaves it titillates, it is due to the species of scrofula, tumors which contain a boil that is drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the carbuncle of the boil has been evacuated, then you complete it with fresh incisions and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound is to be dressed with suitable ointment and left to heal.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the lymph nodes or scrofula is, then you incise there in such a way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the ulcer is extended to such an extent that it becomes gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have said earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Book XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks the artery and the chain (likely referring to a tendon or ligament) is consolidated over it, then dark motes often occur as abscesses. The signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein are: when an abscess is due to the artery, it is long and extends along the course of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor (likely a gurgling sound).
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance along the course of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section over this abscess is error, and especially in those who have armpits, in the groins, in the neck, and in other parts of the body; and it is great, therefore we must ensure that its cure is avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head must be particularly avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the cord; and place the incision near the artery, and deliver the tunics where they will be uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place an needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which cause you to demonstrate in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And place a point in the location which is between two threads with soldering to ensure that the wound in it is closed, and that the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer cure in which oil is applied while the threads are being removed; and treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to venous dryness, then you should hold your hand where you think the abscess is located by its root, and insert the needle at the place you have held with your hand, making that penetration; and take out from one side what you put in from the other side, and ligate the abscess well with good lint as I have said before in the vine fiber of two parts along both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that you will take out the thread, then insert the wax at the needle and with all the abscess, you should make the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads at the places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location such that when it is sitting at this place, you should make the incision of the root, and leave what is wet.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the powder you have submerged in wine and oil, and proceed to administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to twisted nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is percussion or excessive work on them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is most frequently found in the areas of the joints or the thigh, or in any location where the joints are weak.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body. It is located in the larger parts of his body system, and when it is pressed with firmness, one feels in it the patient's sense of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess that extends to the upper part of the body, and therefore he is weak in all parts and does not move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which occurs in the joints should not be considered caused by iron, for strong pain indicates contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More severe is that which occurs in the head or on the forehead, causing weakness through vomiting.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the abscess is small, then apply heat and incise it with a scalpel.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then suspend it with forceps, and incise it, and clamp that part; and adjust the wound with stitches, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have large swellings in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These tumors are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the tumor itself is subtle, but its head is large; and their lips are conversed, both those that are small and those that are greatly magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in its abdomen there were two tumors which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, of subtle origin.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those tumors were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and opened in the one foot having eighteen inches, and the other having six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, you should consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with fine particles; then you incise it with a spatula, and immediately cauterize it in the fire, for the section must be expelled without infection; and if you see the infection, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the gout painful and frightening, avoid incision with iron; rather, when you take lead juice from fresh molten lead, strengthen that tissue, the manner of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly within the tissue, until it is incised and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tissue is of coarse particles, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in those that are in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible that you incise the mass of it, and then cauterize it to prevent it from returning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure that within which the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not incise any part that is of dusky color, with little sensation, and soft to the touch, for such a part is likely cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will provide a reminder of the disease nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of hernia of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the abdomen, and protrudes through the skin or intestine depending on where the other ruptures occur; or by a wound that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by constricted fatty tissue.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a diaphragm fissure and a deficiency in the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then place that part as we have recounted in greater variety of position, and when you press that part with your thumb, the pain is concealed, and then return; it is strong upon you so, and you must make a significant incision for bathing and intense work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if due to humidity, then it is painful and not concealed when you press it with your hand, nor is it strained or relieved.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if due to scald, then at these signs the abscess appears in blackish discoloration.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if due to nothing in the flesh, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is applied according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if due to windiness, then the touch of it is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an arrow wound, or a vein, or due to windiness; then you must refrain from treating it, for there is fear and terror in such cases, as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses due to arrows and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the fabric, then command the patient to lie on their back and extend; then place your hand around the circumference of the navel, and command another person to stand between your hands behind them; then wrap a piece of linen around the circumference of the navel over the spot you marked with the probe; then extend the size of the abscess upwards by one finger's breadth; then fill the circumference around the area you marked with the probe with strong paste or cerate and apply it in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the middle of the abscess over the flannel and insert your finger in that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already palpated it and guarded it with the flannel, then carefully extract it and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have palpated the fabric, then take it with one finger; incise the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that mark, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put them into those strong threads, and insert two needles into the circumference you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, stop the needles and let the area between them allow the extended flesh to fall by itself; or incise that which is subtle and can be pushed, and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh neither in it nor by humidity, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and drain the pus or humidity which you find in it, and then cure that with ointments to consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of pain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of types of pain and in what manner medicines are used to treat it. And we have stated that pain is avoidable if it is not ulcerated; and we have said that pain is generated during the manner and care of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some types of pain are in a location where the eradication of it is possible, such as with headaches which are in the breasts or in the groin and their equivalents in other body parts, to extract all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is old and hard, you cannot expect it to have properties like that, for I cannot heal such a case nor have I seen another, nor has anyone been cured of this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found to be clearly filled.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for the operation in which the preparation is located, and proceed with the incisions which apply to it; and concave from all sides with the probe so that it does not damage any of its tissues.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood run, and do not abscess it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the gross blood with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find it contrary to cut deep for veins or arteries, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capital. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	For the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximately treated with iron for the species of tympanites or the species of hydrops, for that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of tympanic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility from another illness, or another dropsy, such as in their cough or abdominal condition and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the illness due to excessive virtue, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy solely, neither child nor old man, then the method of operation for it is that you lift the illness between your hands, and apply it closely to their abdomen with your hand, expel the wind from their body, and push the water to the outer part of the thigh, and then take a spathula thorn in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is long of two sharp parts, with sharp extremities like a spear; but rather it should be in the latter somewhat brief little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and let it alone.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you feel that section you move away from the navel by the quantity of three fingers to the sides leaving, on the right side above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from kidney disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not feel your section on the side where the pain is felt, lest the superfluities flow to that place and cause harm.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the instrument along the length of the cord, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spear between the cord and siphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an ounce or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the scrotum so that the pus reaches the desired location, which is the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tin, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised like a feather pen, as you can see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, that part quickly rises to the surface, thus evacuating a small quantity of water. If you evacuate more than what fits in the ring within the hour, the patient may die due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or be close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to how the signs of the patient's condition suggest based on the pulse and the quality of the fluid.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it so soon is stopped by the cord which I will pull that is above the chip (or notch) of which you have perforated it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware not to be submerged in the water but only slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let a great quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in dry sand, and washing in cold water, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not yet perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the child is expelled from the mother's belly and the opening of her uterus is not perforated (or is torn straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So the genital opening is perforated shortly after birth with a subtle blade according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a thin lead nail and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate he is relieved and urinates; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not tie the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one that is torn should be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for several days before it is stretched.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the tear is not in its place, as said, the cause is due to those where at birth the tear is located at the end of the head of the vagina so that she cannot urinate from inside; while lifting her hand to raise the vagina above; and it is not a generation issue, for which the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is an illness that lasts.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of perpendicularly, like cutting a feather, or any part you do not reason to cut, so that the vein of him comes forth resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle place according to what fits.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And observe that in your operation for the flow of sand, whenever motes occur, pause at them where you are cutting the sand, and dress the wound so that it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	For the case where you encounter discoloration, decay, and adhesion of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motes (or particles) appear in this case on the penis and on the prominent flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No-maligna, cover that which contains all of that evil with a thin cloth and cut into it; then place yourself over it immersed in Egyptian ointment; then, cure the wound with fine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a bad color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the abscess is in the foreskin of the penis of an uncircumcised person, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part outside, then you should remove the part inside at the beginning before it consolidates; then cure the part outside. For when you cure this together with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be trapped.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the testicles and in the black foreskin, such as corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkening and that which is about to腐化或已经腐化的部分；然后在那个地方敷上一层蜂蜜，它由陈紫罗兰粉、碎玫瑰花瓣和筛过的盐组成。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then attend to that one among the other treatments when it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is in two parts together, used for a flow of blood and for the plague when it is broken out.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the ulcer is corroded and is destroyed entirely within an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease excretes through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce (where this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce is torn, and circumcision is not required over it; and when adhesion occurs due to the plague or an abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument while the glue dissolves and the head of the ulcer is completely removed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the ulcer and the prepuce. This is because when the prepuce is thin and delicate, a slight perforation can be made through its thinness by the blunt instrument.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a thin thread, which is already moistened in the moist cloth so that other layers do not adhere.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic cloth when it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other wounds: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of the others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to it the better operation and the lightest way for the sake of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and this practice has come to us through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with rods; and they use lint with honey and incisions with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with honey and vinegar in the modification like ointment, because you will see that the cord persists above, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and weaken the tougher one and leave the softer one, and make it light enough to be forced into another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the modification which is done by excision, and is digital, of which cobblers use it, it is not secure regarding the incision at the extremity of the male member, because it forcefully enters the vein of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with ointment, you must use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and most do not need to be modified in this manner, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is done with scissors and honey and vinegar, the quality, experience describes to me, for the scissors are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is thus as the sharpness that is below; and so when you press your hand proportionately on two sharps, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of honey in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all sides, with which no error can arise.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay mainly if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do otherwise than to tie the bowel in its vagina only, and leave it until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then prepare that in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place that between your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the vagina and blow into the cervix, and pull that out so that it straightens the head of the vagina, and then modify that which is added to it with sordicity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with bowel doubled, and then tie just below that a little the second ligature, and then have your finger on the site of the ligature with good tension, and cut between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the knee slightly and stretch the head of the vein; and let the blood flow slowly, for that is better; place powder above and on top of the powder put a cloth in which is soaked mullein down in water well beaten with fresh olive oil; leave that there until the next day; cure that with a cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the fingers are not sharpened at the tips and the others are sharpened, let the stem of the key be placed between them, and let the length of the two acute parts be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, the mistake in modification is that you might lift the intrinsic nerve entirely or partly, and you must incise it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, make sure that you extend the one of your hour along your finger before the incision site and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if they have passed three days, and remain what is swollen with the sore suppurating, then you let it be until the abscess is ripe, and puncture that one for ease, and incise it according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the sore, for it will not be in that one.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that with what the plague consolidates from the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the instructions above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an overflow due to a stone or a burning infection, or by pus or flesh, similar to those we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it due to a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then know that the patient has an encrusted stone beneath his loins.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place his feet on his own thighs and extend his abdomen above his back, and the patient should bend his head as far as it is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, so that the urine is relieved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly consider the cause in the patient. Then know that you should perform a surgical extraction using an instrument called a siringue, of which this is the form: It is made of silver and is very thin, similar to a long quill in thickness like half a palm's length, with a fine tube at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of inserting urine is that you take the flax folded and tie it at the end with good ligature; then insert the ends of the flax into the part left by the ring, and cut with scissors if there is any excess cause of the wool, more so insert it in the cannula with force. Then draw the ring close and with a waxed thread.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cesarean section on the mother, and apply the bladder and vagina with a mixture of olive oil and ointment.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the ring gradually so that it reaches the opening of the vagina; and then fold the vagina upwards at the place of incision; and then push the ring into that; and then push that so that it reaches the bladder, and that is set in the mother to be reached by the desired cause, and if not done in this order, but the meat where it is twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually insert the flax into the wool, for urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it for treatment with urine, and use a lancet. Do not cease to do this until the bladder and malady are thoroughly relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitolium.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder, we must use and prepare instruments which are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When accidents such as ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or corruption of the tissue occur there, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it, then a special instrument called a clampcedra should be made. This is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that in the extremity of it is closed, so it is sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three holes: two on one side, thuswise.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which the substance to be inserted is placed. Its capacity should accommodate the quantity that fills it, and when any cause causes the humidities to be drawn out from within, they are drawn out, and when expelled, it draws them back in; and when expelled for a long time, it acts like a clampcedra, upon which naphta is placed in the battlefields of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	To prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of cedar into the humidity, and pull out what is pushed upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of cedar.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of cedar into the urethra as we advised in surgery; and then push the humidity out with what you push, for that humidity soon reaches the bladder, and gout centers there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle cristera in which the bladder is cristeralized, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or tin, of which the head is either like a small feather, and place reed inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder from a mouse, place in it the humidity you want to cristeralize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly with double thread over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the cristera into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with moisture having structure descending where the disease centers as that moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not find the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; and perforate it completely round; then insert strong wire through those cuts, as they are turned; then place the circle so that it is placed, for you pause in that which you want from the humidities, and smell and pour.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you place that in the instrument and do it thus as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol.lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of kidney stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the pear in which we make the cut and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pear generated in the bladder is that which is inserted into the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am now narrating that in the exposition manifestly and briefly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the pear generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and its signs are that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar in subtlety to water, and appears in that sand; and gout rubs its knee, with greenish patches appearing, and soon becomes swollen; and thereupon the buttocks are affected in place of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in the young, it changes through that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the pear is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, cut with a christeri (sharp instrument) which extracts all the opening which is in his intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone, leading to its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient's foot and make it bend and flex in order that the stone descend into the bladder, or may pass from that location or some other time.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place that cushion you have prepared between your hands, and let the other servants hold the patient's limbs, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the positions left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply pressure to it and all that area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly apply pressure to it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it completely with your touch, then cut and apply oil to your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or to your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And because of the heel, after you have placed as I have said, let it be.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little piece gradually to the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it as I have said, and expel that to the external parts, letting the fluid out of the area you are treating.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the legs upward with his right hand, and with his other hand lift the curtain which is behind the legs, in the area where the operation is performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert spathum; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the left thigh; and let the section be over that heel as I have said is in the anus, and let a transverse section be made, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the heel being possible, and not greater. For if the section of the one in the anus, which is the heel, flows too much, you should make the section, and it will be a perforation-removed as its ability.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And be aware that there is sometimes one in which the passage is difficult due to this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that one, it resembles a lion's testicle and is round, and through it a light passage is made.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if that one has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus cut out, then you must either probe it or strengthen it with a proper gesture, the end of which should be like a rasp over the stone, and not escape from it; or you should insert a thin instrument with a curved end into it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then you expand it a little, and if you want a flow of blood, cut through it with a strong incision using vitriol trioxide.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and soon cut over it; and soon push a little there; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to cut out that great section, for which happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or tries to achieve a continuous urinary discharge, by which means the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is outside, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract it from the wounds.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and wrung water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lift the patient's leg on its pillow, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, moisten the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the swelling you encounter an abscess that is hot and corrosive, and appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, through which urine is prohibited (and this is known by the excretion of blood with the urine), then insert your said instrument into the swelling and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corruption and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the swelling with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all spices, using what you find suitable for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And mark the hours of the entire cure that you will perform between the patient's thighs and apply the medicines which are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine excretion is prohibited, then cure it by applying what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness. And now I advise you to use a wire drill, the shape of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the foot.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take filings, and tie it around the swelling, place the stone under it so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the swelling, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturer with your hand around the stone little by little, and complete the puncture on one side before you make it penetrate on the other side; so that the urine is quickly released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is left of the stone from the puncture in the swelling, for that is cracked, and is washed out by the urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not effective for any reason that prevents it, then tie a bandage around the stone, and another above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind over the stone in the swelling with two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligament and modify the sclerotic spot, which is done on the lesion.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need to tie with silk thread the kidney, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligament above this, for when the silk thread is untied near the injury of the kidney, the cord returns to its place and heals the lesion.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you tie the silk thread above, you must lift the cord to the parts above, or return it by making another knot, and the lesion will heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol. lxix.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Kidney stones in women are not commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if there is a kidney stone in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that a strong young woman is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who can describe herself to the doctor whether she is chaste or not.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the surgical operations.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section above the ankle in women is far from the location of the ankle, so you need to make a general incision, and there is danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then you should seek out an old woman who is well versed in these matters, and such a person is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are lacking in such a person, then seek out an old and subtle woman, or present an experienced mature woman who is skilled in dealing with women's issues, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the examination of the ankle to the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, so she should put her finger into the woman's vagina and feel the ankle.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie down on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the vagina and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it well with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually irrigate that from the bladder's orifice to the parts, and keep his urine abundant so that it reaches the patient's thighs.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then lie down on that application of the padding, place the patient's thigh in that part, and keep his limb from being compressed by placing him in a position where the stone is located, so do not cut him.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the grains of pepper are small: some are round and pungent, long and oblong, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know how many spices there are of the pepper that you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to promote bleeding, apply vitriol triplex to the area and keep it there for one hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation once the pepper has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare among your instruments those that you mention in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you are assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to promote bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow descent; do not repeat this. Leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strongly loosening it will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the acute pain of the leg subsides after several days, then you return to your operation when the swelling has subsided.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Aguilous hernia is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white fibrous tissue, which is left by the cord of the genitals containing the humor, and it is named fibrous.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper fatty tissue, which nature prepares at the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white fibrous tissue, which we have said, and it is not this but fatty.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having various colors, its color may be yellowish, or bloody, or red, or black and floury, or watery white, and this is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located: if it is in the scrotum, which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an egg, and one can see the swelling, for the humidity within affects all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own scrotum, then the abscess is round divided from the egg and thus one estimates that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the scrotum and the white scrotum, then cut away the scrotum.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the humidity, you draw the color of the humidity in the abscess through a small incision from which the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the treatment of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lift it slightly onto its back on some cause a little higher, and place the head under some pillows.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his cloth over one of the sides at the thigh and the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the thigh at the midline along its length close to the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to right measure, equally distant from the line where you should split the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white fat layer.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe it, and guard it for this: do not go deeper than that; and your incision should be as narrow as possible, and you should examine the excision carefully according to the quantity you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the fat full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the incision upwards; and do not touch the nerve at the base of the genitalia, and incise the incision in that manner which is possible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin edge, for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you proceed with that from the outside of its nerve during the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the forceps, return inside that, and properly suture the two lips of the genital nerve, and properly care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the spermatic cord, extract the vein, and properly care for that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the fluid is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part just as you did in the other; and if it is apparent to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and insert in the sections submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two genii and the miracle of the belly; and place on top folded cloths and powders, and lay those over bran which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fill them with well-combed wool according to this resemblance; and make the ends which are pressed with a small stick or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers, one end holding the buttocks inside the other, and the second holding the upper part of the groin, and place two ends on each side on the thighs, and all the structure be secured in the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of using iron; so you take a fine surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white chifac containing the water is uncovered, and then you use the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then lance the blister with needles, and excoriate it with needles, and then cauterize it with a fine cautery ignited; and incise that part according as it is possible so as to eradicate all of it; and guard well from the smoke that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the risk of infection, better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter a contrary condition such as an abscess during the time of incision or the time of cautery, or the risk of infection, then handle it according to the treatment that is appropriate for the abscess as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is afraid and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I will advise; and when you are certified by what we have said about the signs, that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you must suture the wound on some elevated part, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the view be wide enough to contain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand firmly over the area, close it, and leave it open, so that the water continues to flow.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And place it over the area where the wound should be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done so that the white linen in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prevents the entry of water, then you must put into the wound a needle or instrument from which water is extracted from the dropsy, the form of which is described; or apply a small pessary to the region of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you must know that the water returns, and is agueguada (probably a term for reabsorption or return to normal) in about six months or until it disappears; and when it has aggregated, then perforate it according to this method, so that the gout passes its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, one must fear great harm if not treated properly; for I have seen cases where it was dismissed and only saved by the best treatment.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses are found in the tissues where the genitals are composed, and this is caused by several reasons: either due to acute aggravated superfluity, which infiltrates the genitals, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and there is no pain in it; it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess is hard and encapsulated, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it occurs due to the concretion of arteries, and due to inflammation of those arteries, as one can recall, or due to inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, which is due to the inflammation of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the apstema when touched there among your thumbs; and note that you should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, which is due to the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed; leave the compression with your thumbs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that sectioning be done on this type and on the other muscles; for you must incise the cord of the testicles, then extend the skin above, and extract the one from the white scrotum, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the skin has already adhered to the muscles, then you must extract the skin and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adherence due to any cause in the scrotum, or between what is between the testicles, then you must deliver all that adherence and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is a native flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind, then incise all of this that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with lanolin soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and then cover it until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol. lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is external.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an apostema enveloped by some envelope similar to a swelling of the testicles, and it makes physical exercise, movement, and walking difficult on the afflicted side.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness there is fear of what preceded it, bringing to mind what comes before.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, incise where we will perform the operation after making the initial cuts.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should cut the afflicted side on an elevated cushion; and then attach the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts left; and place the codena of the inguinal region on your thighs, which are proven by trial. Have another minister assist you, and extend those on strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp knife through a transverse section along the middle of the vessels among which the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you have incised, and tie the other end at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location through a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that it releases the vessels which I moisten with one of two spirits, which is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you incise all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they shrivel due to the incision of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and that they be atrophied, or that they wither on their own.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm, which is located above the abdomen, from the inguinal ring. Because of this rupture in the abdominal wall, some of the intestines protrude through it.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision. These two types occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that develops within the pleural cavity, causing the diaphragm to compress the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it is due to the diaphragm's rupture, as at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears differently from the nearby visible one, which is due to the intestines' prolapse, and the body shows signs around the areas outside the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it is stopped up, and this greatly disturbs the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is feared that the examination in that area should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with his hand at the internal parts of its cavity if he obeys, and then tie it over his collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then open the cord which connects the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles completely along its length; and place it in two flaps of the cut section according to where you need to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if from that section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to let of the humor.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that cyst which they leave the cord of the testicles, while the white hard cyst of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert your finger into that which is being excised from the testicle, into that which is between the white cyst, which leaves the cord of the humor, and between the cystic duct, and release any adhesion that is in the rear part of the humor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the cord of the testicles at the front parts, and with this extend the white cyst in your left hand, and raise the humor to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek around with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard cyst.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause of it, then peel that away and leave it in the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of coarse wool, fashioned from several threads, and insert it behind the scrotum, which is below the testicles, at that seclusive section; then cut the ends of those threads which protrude inside, ensuring there are four threads, and place some of them on a cross-like figure; tie that to the ciphac, about which we have said is the base of the testicles with strong ligature in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels that nourish them can transmit any cause, thereby preventing an abscess from forming.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature a little looser than the first one, about three fingers' breadth away; then with these two ligatures, leave on the ciphac, which is below the testicles, the width of a finger, and cut the rest roundly, and cover it with skin.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut along the part below the scrotum at that section where fluid flows, as we have described in what we have said about this.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, place it on the wound; and apply the salve which we have recommended (and some times the white wax is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of fear of blood flow, for many times accidents occur there) and leave the salve between so that it may fall.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the application is delayed, then pour water to wet it, and place it over that so that it may fall as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with another treatment for wounds as it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been burnt during the treatment of the wound.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is present; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over which there is ease; and then dry out the middle part by applying a poultice with what operates on it, so that the vessels may fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the tendons.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the tendons as we have said, and apply a poultice to the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the surgeons give little cause for concern regarding the intestines; if they do, it is rare; and return them to their proper place at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, there is an adjustment in the cavity where you are placing the intestine; and this occurs due to the extension of the cavity, which is in the tendons as we have said. The cause is that the cavity is stretched, and the area becomes softened and develops into a carbuncle, so apply a poultice.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for it is with a cautery as described in the previous narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by fire according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his side between your knees, and soon the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries up by evaporation according to the width as much as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And soon strengthen the white cloth that is under the bedsheet once it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And soon take the wick and place it over the area where the cloth is raised, and press it against the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And soon prick the two raised areas over the end of the wick of the cloth, and adjust one to the other for suturing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And soon pull the end of the wick out, and do not leave the cloth completely open, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause like this in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And soon treat that in the treatment of wounds, and after cutting the edges, cleanse it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and the raised area of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol. lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Spots on the scrotal skin in some men are caused by the softening of the tissues between them, and it is believed to be due to excess moisture.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is treating such cases to judge when to remove the scrotum according to his skill, and entirely over the softened part of the natural scrotum; and then adjust two flaps at the suturing.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, sew in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and afterward, care for the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed and the stitches dissolve.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause I am reminded of it in this treatise; and the reminder of it is necessary for two reasons, of which one is so that when a physician is questioned about it, he knows the treatment for those to whom it happens; and the other reason is that we may have occasion to castrate other animals for our young ones, such as bulls, goats, pigs, and similar to animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by excision or by making an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by excision, the way of the operation is to kill the beast in warm water so that its genital parts are softened and relaxed.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those out with your hand so that they are resolved and no marks appear upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration performed through incision and extraction, make sure you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those glands that you have excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin one which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where there is a streak or appearance that indicates space in the cord of testicles, in which something resembling female characteristics appears on the skin.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that vein which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the vein of the woman around the clitoris is thus like two testicles of a man, a little more round like the scrotum of a man with its two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should cut those tight flesh areas where the pain escapes, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the cord of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is done on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Labia majora tight and firm are placed over natural causes where it is stretched and made lax with a view; sometimes in some women it is enlarged so much that it hangs like in men and expands during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then ensure that you have the phlegm on your hand or a cloth and wipe it off.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with a cloth, especially on the sole of the foot, to prevent a flow of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then proceed with the care and treatment of the wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that does not appear in the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and a strong cord is tied around the parts outside according to the likeness of the cord (and for this some first called it "caudated evil"); therefore ensure that we cut thus as we cut phlegm, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hemorrhoids are when the vein of the woman is perforated, or is slightly inflamed.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a bad fortune that has preceded, and that is caused either by flesh not fitting well or by a subtle or thick chifac.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is found in the swelling of the thigh, or in the ribs of the patient, or in the upper part of the abdomen, or in the lower part of the body, and you must prohibit coitus and impregnation and childbirth, and strongly you must prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The diagnosis of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, palpate carefully; but if it is not obvious, then you examine that with your fingers or by touch.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a subtle chifac and is close to the two lips, then you separate and dislodge that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating with both hands close by.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips forcefully until that subtle chifac is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and immerse it in oil and place that over the area, and keep a person there to prevent the incised location from being consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a spatula or leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the inflammation is due to a carbuncle, then suspend it with a clamp, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as mercury chloride, dragon's blood, and ashes, mixed with alum.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer an open lead tube to prevent the wound from being lightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for a few days and administer boiled water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with the other consolidation remedy once it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to an abscessed boil, for the abscessed boil which is in the majority do not let any contrary operation be performed in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the cure of hemorrhoids and of itch and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins that constantly bleed within certain areas; and as for old hemorrhoids, they are formed by ulcers.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and ulcers when they are in the pelvis and do not appear in the sensation, then for those do not perform any treatment.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the pelvis and on which there is sensation, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And ensure that you insert the woman into many frictions and then widely extend the thighs with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise those areas with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder the areas where the blood flows from one of the incisive powders over them, doing so as if it were a kiss and with a similar appearance.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then scrape their feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then apply that plaster in a decoction of sumac and of roots of millet grass and of squills and with a similar appearance.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of orchid and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster with this over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is incised, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two flax seeds, and to the breasts perform scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of fennel or in the juice of centaury or in the juice of hyssop in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then dress the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I ask which is of adverse appearance, see that you insert here what appears to you according to what I said previously.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye in the vein.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special cases of abscesses occurring in the vein, such as cancer, abscesses with hardness, ulcers, adenitis, erythremia, fistulas, gangrene, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these illnesses and their special cases, as well as the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And see that I mention in this treatise on abscesses how to use the cautery for one that occurs in the vein when it is among the abscesses that heal, and if you want to know how the operation is performed, I will tell you.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp on percussion and fever, and sometimes that it turns red and if there touches over it the sensation, while noting no perforation of it, and cure it with what helps during the maturation until the acuity of the accident ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should place the woman on a pillow that has two parts; recline her upper body and adjust her legs to the part beyond the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart. Place her hands over her hips, and support her knees with your hands. Liaise the quascus with liament as needed.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow along the rectum straight and administer the instrument through which the opening of the uterus has been opened, the shape of which will be described in the causes that will be given soon.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the lower part of the uterus of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the uterus should not be more than the lower part of the uterus and push through the malaise.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the size of the fist, then cover it with powder on the surface of the fist so that the instrument cannot enter the space of the fist.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Cover the fluid that flows in the blade of the lancet above and ensure that the minister holds the blade and rotates the fluid until the pores of the fist are opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and becomes hot and moist, then cover that part by applying a cold compress to the head with spit from the lancet.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the phlegm is evacuated, then cover the wound with a sponge submerged in olive oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the wick in the area of the fist.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place over the fist and on the woollen cloth submerged in water in which mallows are boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is usually cured in about two days by applying ointment which you apply while it is healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and vinegar, then immersed in water in which lemon or aromatic herbs have been boiled, and then returned to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the liver and hardened, then carefully observe that you refrain from treating it with force, taking care as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to properly treat bruises when they occur in an unnatural manner.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs, and when you see the woman expressing herself at the openings and desiring to smell the air, and being refreshed by what is over her, and hastening the emergence of the bruise, then you can perceive that this part is according to the natural figure, and its emergence is over her head, and the second one is either at or suspended below the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then hold the patient's abdomen so that the fetus descends slightly; when it is on its head, place the second stage, and this is purified from those superfluities through good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another from this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus is situated on its feet and the body of the patient is situated in front of the head of the patient and its feet, or one of its hands, or at its foot, or the head of the patient and its hand, or its abdomen, and strongly it is turned over its own neck, resembling unacceptably the figures of the patient.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For necessary causes, the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those, and what each organ is in them so that it is significant and placed there.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is situated on its head by natural accident, and it is violent for the woman and made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of her already weakened, then apply that sezer, or what women have her, and evaporate the concoction with fenugreek and with humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the probe between his so-called small spout and open the second one, or dry that one with its joint inside where flows what is within it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be anointed with almond oil and fennel oil.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command him, by the Christ, that he be immersed in warm water and make him sneeze by blowing into him; and keep his mouth and nose closed for about an hour, until the fetus comes out quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then cause you to reduce them gradually for facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet off it, and quickly hold the cushion over the ground; and make sure the woman does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside and the wound is not closed, then incise there and extract the fragments of the wound or lay the body on your cloth and extract that equally, for that will be thoroughly cleaned.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the wound extends over its feet, then scrape those parts within it, and soon make the wound smaller, and soon cover it, and soon take a piece of it and extend those parts little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it extends into the thighs, then command him to express it, and do that externally in conditions, for it will be thoroughly cleaned if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not thoroughly cleaned as we have recommended, then return the wound little by little until you cover it according to the natural figure, for it will then be thoroughly cleaned with slight scraping.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it thoroughly in the mortar for good pounding, and line it with the inside of the woman's skin, the lower part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cut in clear water, once you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts around it have become numbed, then perform a mirtle fumigation on it and place your hand over it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a basin, and immediately perform that snuffing and extend the mouth of it, and remove it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will cause the wound to soon become almost unnoticeable.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Place the wound over its depths and its edges.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound has closed in this manner, then insert its edges little by little; and place the woman lying on her side, with her feet hanging down, and those tied to the litter, and bind her securely.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And place your hand gently on her abdomen little by little, and as soon as the feet are freed from the braces, extract them.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them with vigorous movement, and then press what is above the hypochondria gradually as the wound heals to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and close the wound gradually, and command the woman to express it while the wound is not forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Support the hand of the patient in reduction, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her stand.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if standing does not help, then apply the jazer to the wound, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous concussion, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then apply the sizer over cloth, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself while the wound is not forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the patient's leg wide and extend their hand while stretching the foot surface towards the thigh.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife hold the patient's hand and gently rotate the small part little by little, so that it becomes easier to facilitate.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized, then place over the wound what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that a small amount of warm water be given little by little. When you have done this, place the compress on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be well wrung out; and make the compress moisten with condiment.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus's exit is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the horrices of the mother occur according to this manner, consider it, and then incise the second one with your finger so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the one that is causing the obstruction, so that it is not retained and causes harm.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you place that according to what fits, and order the woman to strain herself several times, and it will be easily delivered by gentle pressure, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins or spots of many fetuses are naturally born, and sometimes nine or ten, but more than this is strange and needs to be investigated. Yet the causes are mostly natural, not supernatural.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And concerning these, whether they be multiplied, one second, and are separated by ciphac, distinguish those within the ligament in the navel of each. Sometimes they are easily delivered as if one fetus by natural passage, and some remain for several times through an unmanageable delivery as we have reported.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult, some of them you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all figures as prepared by her leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some pregnancies are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more up to ten. You must verify that a woman who aborts has borne one, another all of them formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife, for she must attend to it carefully, and then place her hand on it so that it is proper.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol.lix.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus where we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery manually. You must consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not among those conditions for which her life is feared to be endangered.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is laid on her back with her head inclined sideways and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tie it to the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the patient with olive oil and honey and juice from alfalfa and flaxseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation on the patient, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will enter the wound.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the wound is prepared to close over its own edges, and then place the fingers in the folds of the skin, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or let the beard be, or on the collarbone, or on the proper locations of the ribs, or let the hypochondria be.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is on his feet, then at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And make sure that the thumb is with the right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have said, until he reaches the underlying cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and hold another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that it is an equal counter-pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be held in all parts, so that the pressure of it may be alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And make sure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them where the retention occurs.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is left out, let the fingers enter where it may be pushed in; and do so until all the fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it until all is expelled, and incise it at the junction of the hand or near the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it experiences constriction during extraction, or there is fluid in its head, then you must insert a pair of forceps between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat" to remove it, the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the fetus has a naturally large head: then you must incise it with a gematius knife, or use an alundat instrument as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the furcifer, when the humidity from the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor swollen, then you incise the head as soon as it suits you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abscesses of the abdomen are suppurated or in it, then make sure you perforate it where the humidity is present.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fistula is on their feet, then the traction of it is light and the direction towards the mouth of the major vessel is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is swollen, you should incise the abdomen and feet, when you extract that piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where the fluid flows.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are reduced and the head returns, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the major vessel is opened, then he should insert his hand into the groin, and seek out the head, and throw that into the fingers into the mouth of the major vessel, and quickly insert one or two fingers, and pull them out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted by an abscess, when it happens to someone, then make sure it is not treated excessively; rather, administer an effusion of fatty humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fistula is on the side of the body, then it should be punctured if possible: and what we have said about the living fistula should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure you do not leave any cause inside the second incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for abscesses caused by an abscess of the main vein.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and near that fire another pregnancy had begun, and the fire is dead for the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time a boil appears on the arm; and it swells up into an open sore, and begins to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed my hand on it using strong adhesive plaster, and pressed with one bone, and after some days, pressed with another bone; and I was too amazed, for in the abdomen there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I incised the wound, and extracted the bones of the dead fetus, the woman having been in her abdominal convulsions for a long time, and had already miscarried in this manner many times, and cured her of a small arm complaint.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not refuse it because it is strange, but rather because in this there is science and aid to what the physician provides through treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the libres, at which equalization there are two vertigos at the two ends of two wires.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, let this vertigo be more subtle in structure, and made either of ebonite or of young wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each wire be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle location between two wires are two adjustments of that same sized wire which are already fastened, the length of which is about a palm and a bit more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a bit more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be inserted in the mouth of the womb so that they are open when you rotate the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that, very subtle and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of fine linen or of wool according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of each, there are two additions as you see, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her back with her feet hanging, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the opening in the mouth of the womb, so that the forceps does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of virtue which the ancients would say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of dressing in which the large head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fishhooks, into which is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of dressing for the hand:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hand having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hand having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which has closing teeth in which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities in which the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of such exist, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and more convenient for the user.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if by this it comes out successfully, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a needle and perforate in the cover one hole and pause there on the burning herbs to cover the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, camomile, scirpus arabicus, and cinnamon.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the needle, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing operation as we have said before, and the second one should be done quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this remedy is not effective after performing it close to this cure and it does not work, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or poppyseed oil, and then insert that hand into the womb and search for the second one, as you have found the first. If it is attached to the mother's hand, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, remove it little by little so that the mother does not fall due to the strong pull.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you move it to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and treatment of the womb with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If you do not exhaust all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue it in repetition of abstraction, but instead apply what is effective from it to the mouth of the large intestine and to the cleft of the woman, and then chrismate it with ointment and tetrapharmcon; for that will cause it to be reduced within a few days and will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you permit it to pass, raise the bad humor to the head, and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; then ensure that sub-fumigations and suitable remedies are administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Moreover, some of the Ancients recommended sub-fumigations with nard and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menstruation and the second product:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thin end should be placed in the chimney, and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while the subfumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the child is born and the anus is not perforated, which have already been treated with a fine ligature.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her said ligature; otherwise, perforate it with a sharp needle, and take care that it does not touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place warm wool in oil and wine over it; then apply ointment to it while it is warm.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is ligated, then insert a cannula for several days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if an anal fistula occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that discharge pus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that discharge low pus are often large, and those that discharge similarly are near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or a boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that infection is old and flows from watery white moisture or subtle suppuration, sometimes these are from such fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what happens from them through the discharge and by wind condition; sometimes the patient uses the site of discharge, and a strong smell is emitted from such boils.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from some of these fistulas, sometimes the penetration occurs into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and from those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to determine whether a penetrating fistula goes into the buttocks or not, you should insert your finger into the buttock, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no pus.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is hardness, then insert a thin probe of lead or horse hair into that probe feeling the thread or the hair in your hand.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all, nor proceed from any cause of excretion, worm, or hardness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrable, and now your treatment is complete.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrable into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of this is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it is penetrable into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the affected area; and that it remains red for some time; and that it does not respond to this treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrable fistulas, complete cure is not achieved, and the cure of these requires the labor and skill of the surgeons over which they preside.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, cure with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and what already exists and precedes.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs between his hands, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and then insert a lead or iron tube, if it is in the tortuous fistula, into the place where the patient feels the pain.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels the pain around the throat, then you must insert the thumb in the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the pain in your thumb already by itself clearly penetrating, or something between your thumb and that siphon or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no cure there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it is cured in some men after the third day.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which hope is placed for recovery, you must heat a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as is precedented, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you feel that all those flesh-flaps adhering in the fistula are firmly closed, resembling the feathers of a bird's wing.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that which is full of veins wrapped in skin where all those tissues are swollen, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is cured, well; and if not, then it is not cured within some time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the vein enters but does not penetrate inside, you say that which is in the anus, and between it and the veil-like membrane of flesh or skin, and scrape the fistula in what dries the surface of the anal canal, then dry the anal canal from the beginning of the fistula, and you should dry the vein itself, and let it be inside the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the vein passes through, and through the vein it is relieved and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistula tissues which are similar to the canal of an ass's penis and do not rupture from any of these causes.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you have exposed those tissues, then let it be as much as possible and for the light pus, use a cautery with fire or with sharp medicine. For the cautery with fire adjusts well two habits: it is the compression of those tissues adjusted, and the removal of blood by the exsudation of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is in bags wrapped in skin or cut threads between the area that gets red, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when the restoration occurs, it is healed, and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if there is a tent and between you and it is a veil of cloth or flesh, and it is close to the penetration, then do not perform an operation on it but rather according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer one of three ways in it: either cauterize that as we have said; or secrete that until you achieve the cavity of it so that you can introduce the necessary instruments and cure it willingly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of damaging the muscle containing the nerve, and act against the will of nature; then cure it according to what we have said, which will surely be healed; or extend that veil and clean that until it is dry near the buttock as we have said, or by tent or another instrument of acute extremity, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the secretion near where you can prevent crustation; then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by secretion, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the open fistula at the part of the buttock, it will be easier for nature.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the fold behind the surface of the body near the buttock margin, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the wounds according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert the probe wrapped in several threads or around them; and then insert the probe with threads into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the buttock inward, then you extract the thread in this way that you insert your hand into the buttock; and you extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. And when more flesh is incised, strongly reinforce those areas where the flesh has been incised between the two ends of the thread.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but ensure it is done gently so as not to tear the skin. Then proceed to treat that area until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the pointed probe for which the fistula is split: the curve of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to tear what is unnecessary, thus you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds: one where the area between the buttocks resembles charcoal, or those that are like the fat of a raisin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, some are small and large, and the pain from them sometimes occurs intermittently or constantly, and affect the anus, as well as its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that affect the anus are generally due to lesser humidity, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows continuously, and are characterized by the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the belly is that you command the patient to lie down and squeeze between when the belly relaxes and the veins appear before your eyes.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you sit down and suspend your arms with those that you have at your fingers, and subsequently apply those to their sides.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if your fingers do not have those arms because of the moisture and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or hard or flaxen string, and extract those with the tongs called tieus, and subsequently apply them and powderize over them some powdered cauda near the application, so that they may be applied as if by cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttock does not yield to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite of a cautery, and wash it with that water which is in the belly and which yields slightly to evacuation when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, and the cause is slight, then you should grasp them with your finger or grasp them with forceps, incise them, and cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have made an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from those parts, and make the thread penetrate through the opening of the other part, wrapping both ends of the thread around the part past the needle, laterally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a warm cloth soaked in olive oil or ointment over the buttocks; place it there and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that which is inside; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or some other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Injuries caused by the opening of a wound or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and not useful in medicine, when you need to treat them, do so with the point of a needle or with your finger, making them moist and then covering them with a dressing that prevents their consolidation; then treat those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you treat them with stronger ointment than the first, once they start to scab and become excoriated; then treat those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of abscesses, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it appears as a round swelling according to the color of the body, resembling a knoll. It occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains, you should lance it.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then ensure that what is within the circle of the key is cut out, and held with forceps or tongs, and eradicated from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as described in the said chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a small sharp rounded pimple appears on the surface of the body, and red spots from veins are often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment is to extend and excise it, or to tighten it with a needle or with thread that holds it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already, they are eradicated both directly and indirectly with the instrument which I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a large pimple or fistula protrudes on the surface of the body, often accompanied by pain. When you touch it, it appears to be stung like a bee's bite, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a penknife or a lancet, strong, and place it over the blister between which you contain the circle of the knife's edge; then return your hand around the knife as you enter what is in the circuit of the blister, and place it in the prominence of the flesh, and eradicate the blister from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a lancet of iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The upper part of the lancet should be fine, blunt (i.e., non-piercing), wrapped so that above it the learning mark may be concealed and the rotation of that [lancet] may be performed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described in the cauterization of athyld in the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that you administer with the cruciform cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the cruciform cautery is made of silver or tin or forged and beaten iron; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those that you administer, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cruciform cautery of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of pressing great and slight:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and let it be placed in such a way that the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (not open) like a lion, making it subtle; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and let the width of the opening be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one being a little smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed be one palm in length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with several openings as if it were twisted; and the space which is between the openings should be the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into these openings strong raw honey or around them; adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed there, make it straight in the head of the cannula between two separate points with strong constriction, and then cannulate each opening: More importantly, the quality of cannulating each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is neither too thick nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is supine on his back, elevates his legs and places them on cushions; another servant holds his chest and holds his hands. Then he applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste to the tip of the cautery; then inserts it into the anus facilitating its entry, and the minister takes the bag and expresses the contents into two more and we maintain intensity until all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the basin; then remove the basin and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to vomit, have it as much as it can bear; and if it sleeps all through the night, it will be better in health.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you perform an operation on the patient for belly distension and vomiting of its contents, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a fine cautery, among the cauteries on which children are tested.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plaigues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of the plaigues what pertains to the free and to medicines according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plaigues are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the area on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why you see the plaigues are thus: from kidney stones, or a stab wound by a knife or sword, or a blow with a lance, or a strike with a stick, or an arrow, or similar to those caused by such motions.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More specifically, the plaigues that are on parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, or similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I shall now recount the treatment of some plaigues, by which you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plaigues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple headaches, for the recall of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third book.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when there is an accident in the head causing a simple headache and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or similar object, and has already struck the brainstem just severely and is a large headache and you fear the imminent onset of an abscess from such injury, then you should examine and incise the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract from it as much blood as its virtue requires if no other reason prevents venesection, especially if the blood that results from the headache is limited.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection is from the opposite side of the affected area; and one must prevent the patient from filling up, from drinking, and from eating heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits the venesection, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the headache if an abscess is suspected, applying heat with olive oil or with wine that has been steeped in herbs.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if recent and the blood has not changed, apply the powder I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has already changed it, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to a deep cut and the edges do not close properly with stitches, then adjust those with sutures according to the suture method I will describe.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already exposed the bone and pen, and it is not due to retention but a small suspensorium, then incise that area and cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh nearby in its proper place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he takes pleasure: meats and vegetables resembling his usual diet until it heals completely.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that area and drain it, and cure it accordingly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these swellings the artery or vein through which blood flows and can lead to bleeding cannot be prevented by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut part, you cut it with a knife or ligate it; if necessity prompts you such that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood is being shed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; try that you powderize this powder over those, which hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, blood of dragon divided two parts, gall three parts not extinct; let all be mixed three times and sieved, and let the swelling be filled with it, and be confined by good constriction over that which adheres it, and coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is not absorbed, for the medicine will not work until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes one does this cautelously alone when no burning material is at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on large wounds when you deem it necessary to close them up straight and to leave the recent wounds, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is summer, then I do not place this powder in its position. But then cure those as we have said, try placing your hand on those cleaned and cooled dressings, or place your hand on those powders of wheat flour in water and honey that promote healing; and place the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the bone of the wound and it is small, then you extract this with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between the head wound when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, if it is a nerve, it should not be sutured but rather avoided, with vigorous compression, as described by Ziniar and Zege who say it is vitriol and similar to them in causing damage to the nerves and opposing those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause over the wound from cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the core of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as when washed with cold water twice, occasionally infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and thuya when washed with cold water and the other herbs mingling according to this manner, and apply a moist ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then suture it, or draw the edges of the wound together, and subsequently treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part of the abscess, then perforate it at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has already incised an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or tie it up, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the shoulder are already incised or totally cut, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound and suture over the bone of the shoulder without touching that; bandage it and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with proper structure for a few days; and apply ointments in which there is stipticity and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already penetrated the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from it; what cannot be reached, leave it until the wound suppures, and is separated and the inflammation around it subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle it with the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then treat it separately, and the cure for that will be described shortly in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or similar when made between the shoulders and are made by spear or by sword or by lance or by similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and you measure its depth, then consider more whether the wound has any swelling when the patient faints; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder to it for the first hour, and do not press it too hard so that the blood does not get retained in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which might cause further harm to the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment, and remove the powder after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then pause at the openings of the wound as long as necessary so that what comes from the humors may flow; and make the patient lie over the wound so that what is in it may run out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	And if since the wound has passed three days or more and no spasm or tremor of the bad heart nor constriction of the windpipe occurs, and you use other good dispositions for it, then you may know that the wound is healed; and then cure that with quills and another treatment until it is cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	And if the healing of the wound is impossible, and all the time it remains open, you may know that a fistula has formed; then cure that according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a sword or knife incision and is superficial on the foot or thigh, then cure it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if it has already inflamed the bone, and you have incised several times, then you should stretch the wound and tug at it to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them as they are to allow the plague to drain out, which makes their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of the plague in other members, the treatment in cure is as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plague in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great pain, sometimes cut the intestine or nerve of the intestine, so that there is an intervention in them and their suturing will be more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I believe that their reduction becomes more difficult if you do not immediately prevent the intervention in them from reaching their place, as they open up and become swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the stitch of the abdomen is according to four ways, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching the other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other stitches proper communicate with the other parts, but more properly own in the stitch of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you for each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine is pushed through it, and it becomes difficult to return it, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then know that you apply the attempt you submerge a sponge or a wet cloth in pure water alone, or you take squill, cyperus, and spikenard, and mix them with the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes in those days I saw this done with astringent, it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which almond and mallows are steeped, for by this it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intestine is close to this cure, then incise the disruption a little with an instrument on which veins are inserted.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better when it is proper that it is not sectioned, and does not occupy too much to dry up unnecessarily and cause deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, note its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip is subtle, but not so subtle as that of a spatula, somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, then ensure that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over this, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the rupture is wide, and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must place the patient's back on the chair, and position their legs further apart than its shoulders; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must place its head and feet further apart from the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the wound is may be further apart from the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And you must apply this to large wounds and to medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And for small wounds, pause what you have prepared and then ensure that the administrator stands between your most skilled assistants, who hold the wound with their hand and adjust its edges, and then uncover it to show where the suturing is needed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the amount of the wound's width; then leave the end near the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or another that you do not put a thread in both ends of the needle, but in two ends of the clip that is left from the disruption on the inside, before making it penetrate from one side. And you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the clip, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; then let the thickness of the digit remain and put another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the thick ones are difficult to handle in suturing, therefore it is best that they be medium in thickness and subtlety.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not good to place the needle at two nearby ends of the suture, for fear that the flesh be lightly penetrated and that the wound gapes before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound does not prohibit its healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not penetrate too deeply and harm the patient's depth perception; place powder from all parts over the suture, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you can tell that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of stitches with needles in what manner is more convenient for small wounds, because only one needle or two or near those is enough for their suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second stitch is made as follows: and you perform the suture of the four extremities, from the thread and two extremities of the needle, in one go, with a needle enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when you have the needle penetrated these four extremities, you withdraw the needle from that thread where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the surface of the wound, so that the suture resembles a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place the distance between each suture equal to the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I healed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly, where he had been stabbed by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major wound about two palms wide, situated around the middle intestine for two palms from the center. And it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part after the intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the swelling is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and heal that and it is cured; then that viscous fluid by natural means, and it is converted into its natural state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not cured; and by miracle of fire, since I did not heal that without ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but I placed my hand over the swelling as an old woman applies it twice a day and kept applying moistened water of honey until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will say two species of suturing properly according to the narration of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside of the other side.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle penetrates through the chain stitch and along the thread in a straight line throughout the entire length of the body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside out through the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same part externally to internally from one side to the other; and leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other internal part from externally.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the probe at the end of the needle which is in the part of the body until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this lateral side, and with the end that is of the probe on the other side, extract the needle which has penetrated, and return it to the sheath with the end of the probe that is on this other side; and extract it from the sheath which is on its part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and another, and do it one more time or another time until you sew all that is external according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a thread of skin, on which you sew the skins, ensure that you sew the probe one time from the part of the end of the sheath, and leave the other time open until you finish attaching it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second species of suturing which Guilia teaches and is based on her experience, is that you suture it according to semilunar form which many doctors suture in this way. They attempt to join all parts to their corresponding part as nature dictates; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of the wound, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the extremity of the wound on your own side of the part from which it is drawn, and make it penetrate into that part from the inside. Leave two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside into the two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those threads, and make each part penetrate from the inside into the part from which it was drawn through the other extremities of the wound on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and this is the suturing method of which I have previously reminded you.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Gualia's saying
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And sometimes they would say, the stitch of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these some thread, and starting from the introduction of the needle as you should, make that one penetrate into the other layer according to the stitches which equally join the layers.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then the stitch there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More the judgment of plague medication is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That cause is when you obtain the recent plague from his own venom before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, suture it, and properly dress it, then place it over that carnate powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it over that, some ointments which are present among you until they make hard scabs and settle the threads, and be consolidated chapped and inspected; and cure it in this way as the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for now, until he begins to sweat much, and continue alternating it twice a day as I have shown you, until he is healed, for you will not need any other medication in small doses when the illnesses are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the illness might spread to the main limbs, then immerse a lion's wool in good-quality olive oil or in refined oil, and place it around the areas between the thighs, leaving the axillae exposed.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, for several days you should apply this, then compress that with a piece of black styptic wool, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine and caused an ulcer penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the swelling of the large intestine is less severe and quicker to heal than that in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gungun" does not receive healing from any illness that affects it; this is due to the great number of veins in it, its large size, the subtlety of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are treating is the skin, and you have reached that recently, reduce it according to your skill by which you return the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed into the space and is already red or black, when you tighten that with astringent over the area that is darkened, so that it brings forth flows of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then incise what is another in that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut part of the wound, so that above you it may be alleviated the attraction of the wound; hence close the opening of the skin and discharge of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be reduced in some people, for I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right part of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and it healed from the operation and distension.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not constricted in the healing of him, but seek to subtlety place that which is healed by fire and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I see the area already consolidated, I proceed over the patient that you avoid the accident of harm in his own belly; and do not harm any by this evil accident and rob in their meal dispositions eating and drinking, and then enter into bath and exercise in his speech.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when an inflammation is in the intestine and it is small, then you must tie it according to this manner: and you take fireflies from large caps; and then adjust the two lips of the inflammation and place one firefly of those which has the mouth open over the two lips of the inflammation; therefore when it takes on those and strongly closes its mouth, you cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another firefly near the first one, and do not cease to put fireflies one after another according to the quantity of the entire inflammation.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and the wound; and drain those attached nodes within the intestine until it is healed; and do not harm the patient with any injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been tied with fine string made from the intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should grasp the end of these strings of intestine, making them somewhat raw, then tie the end of it with fine string wrapped around, and insert that fine string into needles and into the place where the intestine was, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with needles is nothing but a matter of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no injury but only inflammation, and it does not heal from it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure for abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when it is wrapped and allowed to become old, and forms an ulcer, and does not heal completely but continues to discharge pus constantly, wherever in the body it may be, is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, fistula is a hardened, white node, from which there is no pain and which is cavitated like an abscess; therefore it is called a certain root or branch, that is, an abscess.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people it is wet, from which the branch flows; and when the wetness is strong, it is expelled within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this wetness is thin, small, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously stated in the division, when I spoke of plaques, that any ulcer which is not healed or remains covered with some skin, is this only through one of nine causes: of which one is due to insufficient healing in the body; or due to malice; or because between it and the skin there is hard flesh prohibiting natural growth of flesh; or because it is thin pus; or because that ulcer itself contains corruption and the matter within it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in in the region, and there is a pestilence; or due to the property of the region, as in Saragossa, where it causes difficulty in digestion of diseases, and delays the healing of an abscess by nature; or because it contains bone or mixed bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus cover so that I make you know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for those are fistulas that extend to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like the hand and foot; and these are those close to the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus of these fistulas that occur in this manner are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation; for such is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and want to gain knowledge of it, then take a试探或铁器，如果瘘管按照直线延伸，那么你可以触及它。
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead being light of its body is alleviated and curved to relieve the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cristelize the orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you cristelize that one will flow from the others.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire exactly, according to the manner by which you can know if here you have a vein or a nerve, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or close, or it is a fistula with only orifices that you treat completely with your strength, with your inquiry, with which you inquire about the patient, and with your compression on the area by your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the accident in the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have been on all those causes at a true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent nearby or in a hollow, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the areas which we tell you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that entirely until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preon until it is as deep as possible, and thoroughly remove all rotten flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry it as we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or a nerve or a main limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is uncovered and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must rush into that where the corruption be halted entirely; and then care for that as soon as the flesh within it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	But if it is not yet healed and you graft it thus as you do, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover again over it thoroughly make the rationale of it and the purification of it with your last strength, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	But if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	But if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps that fit well.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	But if there are many bones, then thoroughly perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any due to lack of your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you encounter any contrary cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your turn, then pause over the wound that allows the wound there, and leave it within which is near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and secure the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, pause over the cut submerged in a hot bath of oil, or a cut submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments. When these ligaments will have healed, and the bones are separated from them, then the inflammation is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or rib or similar, and what decays in it affects only the surface, then quickly drain it only behind where the blackness and decay are stopped, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is from it has rotten greatly, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise all around into the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure that after it has consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you when examining a man in the thigh to place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom occurs pain in the thigh, and within the parts is gout about the material inside the body that has reached the thigh, and the material is a great abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess was allowed to expand due to the error of the doctors until it matured, and the materials within it began to pus. The cure for him was nearly completed when the leg became fistulated, and you made openings in the ulcer through which pus and bodily fluids drained.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the treatment lasted for about two years, and they were not skilled in the art at that time, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And see the vein and the materials that were flowing from those openings throughout the body; and already the condition of that man was completely stabilized and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones were connected to them from all parts of the vein.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I examined and incised over one of the openings through which I could describe a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupt, and discolored; and a part of the vein that had penetrated into the marrow was already corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out what was not in the bone but that corruption which I clamped and cut away, and I had already reduced it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then continue the restoration of the wound with conservative medicines for a long time, and do not allow it to become consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you should examine and re-examine the bone after the initial examination, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And observe what appears to me of that corruption, and then you should proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you should examine it on the other side and not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and proceed with the restoration. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm's breadth of it, and that extracted its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of the vein, but rather due to the position of the ligature and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, since it accedes continuously in all hours due to excessive evacuation causing bad fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the flesh durable; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and not made contrary to him in movement nor damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then you must correct it in this manner: You should grasp firmly and strongly that part of the prominent bone at its extremity, and command someone to extend that part. Place a thicker woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone was left, and stretch the extremity of the bandage so that it draws the flesh towards the left area. You uncover the flesh over the location you wish to cut for the blade not to cut through the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut through the flesh that is damaged.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And you must ensure that the cut is small and gradual over the damaged area, for if the corruption is within the bone's cavity but does not appear in its visible manifestation, you may need to make another incision.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not protruding, there is one continuous part connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fustes, and next saw through that part where the corruption is, so that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be made according to the location of the corruption, as we have said, slightly smaller.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but irregular.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the side of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and drain that area according to any disposition which is within your ability. In every case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; because you must prepare for every species of operation an instrument convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that that operation means to you regarding the species of instrument of which you will need; when you have great study, length, and knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of illnesses, so that when you have them, you can choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should at the end of this chapter form an understanding of the number of instruments which you will use as simple ones that you will proceed with according to your prohibition, which you will experience with others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another shall be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the stellar points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you should not insert anything but that the heads of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or the large mouth be widely opened.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of razor greater than others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of razor smaller:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of razor broad:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of saw another properly made: let it be made arc of it mostly over and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of well-made pointed blades.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of razor in which it has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor, or another fine:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a bone knife with which bones are incised:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its end is like a point, and it is used in several places in the proportion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray which you apply in proportion to the one that is pierced into the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the incision at the end and the sawing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and if the corruption does not respond to your cure, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member you did not perceive any cause for, then you must investigate that member internally to reach where the corruption resides, in order to expel the malady by death or malice which is a greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of that which has been affected is that the member turns black before it is touched, as if burned by fire. You may notice the blackness within that part of the member that has turned and has taken in all the body; therefore carefully investigate that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, the cause of the corruption may be a percussion by some venomous causes such as those from a scorpion, viper, or rue.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you reach your hand, cut that of the thigh, and do not give space for corruption to enter within where it might take hold in the arm's brachial region.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you prefer that one, then cut the arm between the shoulder and the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the shoulder, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers the sole of the foot, then cut that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then cut the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the heel, then cut the leg between the joint of the heel.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the heel, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and to leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the ligament in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the minister a ligament to the parts left, and extend the minister another ligament on his side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that all the flesh is uncovered within where it will be cut or closed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides over it so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the wound heals, it comes together properly without an abscess forming.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there happens a flow of blood while working, then you cauterize the place frequently, or apply some constricting powders over it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the injured member with a ligament as is convenient, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if someone has an injury on his foot, this incident which we have recounted, the one that often occurs in him a blackness in his foot due to burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidently first occurs within said entrails where it tends to the flesh.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to wait until he sees the cure go to the member with the urgency of his pain and from the inflammation of his flesh, and the infection enters the joint, and the flesh is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time that corruption accidently affects the thumb of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and so I force it to reflect on dispersing that excess around what is retained over the hand of the medicine; near the purification of the body; and the excess is not reflected but begins to go into the other thumb where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they make me incise the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the cutting of the hand of the patient will lead to death, as the virtue of the patient is overcast.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and tells me that man prepared and incised his hand entirely, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide so that it may be understood and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of lavage with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apostema occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the apostema is prolonged to collect pus, and then it breaks and is perforated, and the pus is drained, and the area remains clean as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it is so fine that no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor in sinew, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Moreover, if the space is prolonged to the extent that corruption imprints in any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were rotated, especially when it is fine and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the string will adhere and that the corruption has not reached an irreversible consequence, and on the string there has passed through, then you cure it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the wound has an unpleasant odor, then treat it with an enema using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed in equal parts, placed in a vessel, and heated over a fire until the medicine boils and reaches a specific point similar to honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; then treat the sinus with this, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the swelling subsides.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is performed with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take the ash of vetch, put it in water; then extract that and perform the enema until you are sure that the sinus has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with a third part of wine, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to modify and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and drought in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is already healed, then administer that mixture with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take ointment of dyafinicon, dissolve that mixture with oil rubbed and wine dried; or you administer that mixture with several medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus's orifice is wide in which the clister tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and place something cold wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment while enlarging it.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the aperture is large, then you should suture the lips of it and leave in it a quantity in which the enema will add to.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the aperture from which the fluid flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the fluid can flow into it. When the aperture is narrowed in the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the area below according to your wish, then you should puncture the member with an appropriate preparation so that the fluid flows slightly from it according to what you are able to do and without any obstruction of the fluid.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in the place you want, extending them over linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to communicate with the entire sinus; then cut with scissors along the length of the aperture of the sinus, making a slit slightly wider than the aperture; and extend over another piece of linen the lion's ointment according to the size of the slit, and place it above that for a distance away from the aperture of the sinus so that the inflammation of the fluid is alleviated and does not irritate the cloth much, but only for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out of place on the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you consider the location of that sinus, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has already adhered, or is approaching adherence, then at once remove it or let it dry for a day. When you remove the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the sinus, there is a subtle infection spreading. Therefore, do not worry about its adherence, for the healing of it approaches. For in some people, the generation of flesh in their poultices takes longer, and in those, you must do the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for several days it is situated near the brach and indigest, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment ypaiychicon when there is an excess of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of ypaiychicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and mix it well in its substance, and apply it carefully, and use this one.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And make it seem in that action when there is no brach, ypaiychicon ointment, honey when it is cooked until it thickens, and use this one; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, mix them all together and powder them over the honey which is on the fire, and then line it with cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to him some long leaf of aristolochia and a root of lily celestial (and the lily celestial), and flour of arsenic and centaury, and use those simples either adjusted, press them and sieve them and powder them with honey which I have recommended; and use of this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the root of it, and you should investigate in the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of gangrene, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Gangrene is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is severe in other fingers, and when prolonged and its cure is less valued, it becomes a septic apostema or corrupts, and spreads into the arm where it corrodes the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupts that entire area, and spreads its corruption to the bone within which it gives off a foul odor. The extremity of the finger is then amputated, and the color of the wound becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover yourself to remove all the fluid that is released from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cautery movement is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the adducions of the joint have already compressed the flesh at its internal divisions, and begin to prick and lead it, then cover yourself by placing a fine probe at the angle of the joint that pricks the flesh, and push that out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines corroding and comburentz are fully absorbed; then cure that with ointment once it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will be healed that is in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that area, then incise there in one of the joints according to where its location is remembered, and cure that once it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then you at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and subsequently dry the joint with a sharp spatula in a transverse section above in juice, and guard that the drying does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will thereby cause the patient severe pain, which is due to the natural state of excessive flesh adjusted in that place; and then treat that area with what relieves the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Moreover, the adjusted flesh, which is found in many people, is very fatty throughout, and very light in their bones, or very soft in their joints.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of it is found in the soft part of the joint, or the natural state of it is located in several nodules of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Moreover, that which is found in several nodules of the fingers is not soft, and this which is found in the joints is very soft.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are naturally fatty, the drying is light, and you should incise it with a sharp spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is hard; therefore, guard yourself from its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult for those born near the kneecap, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around in a round cut into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those suitable grooves for this, and then cure what is inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers among their joints due to visible motas, or by birth where the person is born with them, or due to consolidation of plague or combustion of fire, or similar cases, then ensure that you treat this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their dressings what you have infused in olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and shape it to fit the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of varicose veins, these are the symptoms.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are these, and they are thickened veins filled with melancholic superfluities that flow in the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the groins, especially in the groins of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and subsequently draw blood from the patient at the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More importantly, the treatment for them can be done in two ways: one way is to incise and remove that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: apply a poultice to the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is due to the groin, and then strengthen the patient's thigh above the cushion on the side opposite the abdomen with a bandage. Next, secure the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide application of dryness, and using your hand, elevate the black blood from below the groin area upwards into the limbs, until you have expelled the quantity you desire and that is sufficient to counteract the malignity.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind her, and command her to abstain from foods generating black choler.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are marks on the skin, then place it in hot water and wrap the leg with wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it forcefully if hot water is not available, until the limb is flushed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord along the vein by sectioning it lengthwise or at the rear of the limb you should lance it, or at its lower part you should cut it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears by sensation, and you should notice the color of that rope turning to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, having freed the cord, you see that white which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that cloth elevated and folded from the thigh, suspending it on an iron of lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then expose the thigh from above the vein as it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the thigh, and then extract and elevate it as it is inserted through the second section, and then extract that which is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this as you extract that which is in the section that is more above or higher than all other sections, as it is inserted entirely; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert that cloth over the iron and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loose.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that mass and has come about due to damage through that incision.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the entire part is fougated, then pause over the place of the wound linen submerged in wine and olive oil, both roasted and unroasted, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then cut about that entirely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the places of its envelopment, and suspend that with threads as you lift that entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not pierce it, for it will be difficult to lift that; use your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision at which it is dried vein:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an incision for a hernia:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as with other threads so sharp nor of acute extremity because it will not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the calf vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands of calves as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, in dry and barren places with little tenacity and in which neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And elsewhere in the body, this vein is generated other than in the calves.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain as venom within the body turns into serpents, worms, and lice that generate between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this condition is from this vein: when you touch the calf, there is intense inflammation; then the area becomes swollen; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the location of that swelling, seeming like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, as the extremity appears, cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachma, or two drachmas, and press it there, leaving the lead suspended from the calf.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while that which is outside has been entered, for if you incise that which is inside, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because the abscess must be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, without any cause allowing it to re-form in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, one has been cut in some men whose length is about five or six palm lengths, and I have already been informed that one was cut of twenty palm lengths.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that which is long in the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it through the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings to it many orifices, and is situated from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and what was said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and called the bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands the bovine disease. It is caused by worms that frequently appear among cattle, and one such worm is native between the skin and the flesh, and ascends and descends throughout the body, and is evident from its movement from member to member, breaking through the skin and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, maggots, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the vein, then greatly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and this frequently occurs.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not perform it if you do not consider its natural movement and appearance through sensation, then collect what is upon it and what is left from it in liniment and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find it to be near the heart, then strongly bind over the eyebrow with a strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and consider that the disease uses modification of its body through medicines that expel putrid bad humors, and abstain from foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on the illness of the nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, and often is transmitted from one part to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that which I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I have been called to a sick woman in a village, and examined her arm where I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I observed that this swelling went up like vermilion, though less intensely than feared, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I noted the pain in that area and placed a compress on the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I moved to the other side of the body where I applied it to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that she should move her body all over; and it was too marvelous to see the change in her and the speed with which the pain moved from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my hands according to that manner, but I have seen many cases where it is found that pain is permuted from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have such heels as in the female.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is because the female had a thin body and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that swelling changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delicate and have soft, engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear on the heel as we have said, then strengthen that area and let it be slightly and gently over that until the swollen swelling is inserted, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it on the heel, then cure that by excess of the body and by what you expel of swelling, and administer those that stink in pills and those of serapie and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur; for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and blunt, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues, and of those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet in which they occur is according to two manners: for the members or are principal causes, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it strikes any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will recount soon, then you should avoid the extraction of that arrow in those where death is found, especially in the major dispositions, and when to you do not appear these evil signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the arrow is when it strikes the skull, which is above the brain, for it happens through the intense and violent pain, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and there is a white moisture in the area of the wound resembling dust, and from it appears like an excess of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it has entered the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and you can feel a hard lump there, which is not visible; and strong movements of the arrow seem like movements of the pulse, and flow of the black bloody wound, and there is a coldness at the extremities, pallor appears, and syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes great pants or gasps for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow has entered the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, it causes a great and violent pain and heavy breathing, and not all the members are relaxed in the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then strongly extract any undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you find an arrow in the abdomen, and it is embedded there, open a wound in the wound, or the tissue, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope of its cure by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and it penetrates through urine, and the process comes out through any opening, and there is strong pain in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But for other members such as the face, the neck, the shoulder, the arm and its helper, the vertebrae of the back, the clavicle, the thigh, and their counterparts in the limbs, they are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, nor is it a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this concerning their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck his eye in the lacrimal of his left eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, leaving his ear bone with its grey matter intact, and he recovered without injury to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the eyeball, leaving only the eyelid; the arrow was hidden and could not be removed except for a small extremity which adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron without any ear bones.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and was not injured in his eye despite the serious injury.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was embedded in the shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one had ear bones; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was submerged in his shoulder; then I carefully separated it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his belly, and I perceived that he died from that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his disposition, I incised over the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and was not harmed by this accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound had healed over. After about seven years, incise the arrow near the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman to whom an arrow had struck her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and there had been no change in her disposition over time, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man to whom an arrow had struck his face, and the wound had healed, with the arrow remaining broken inside. He did not experience much pain, and appeared similar to others in this regard.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal subject, who had an arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly deviated to the right side. The entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of him near the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you will find the arrow wound with your hand stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels subtle, and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture and let go of his right ear, and then you will suspect that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a poultice to the place you have applied, which has attractive and digestive virtues, trusting that this place will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries up there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not neglect the significant location where the arrow has hit; and continue applying the poultice to it for several days without neglecting this; and during this time, the wound consolidates, and the bad effects of the extraction last for several days until one day I feel the arrow within its shaft and recount this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And touching it, you will find that, and feel the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine where I visibly see the tip of the arrow appear, and pass to my time through the space of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is broadened, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that, and without hesitation, I did not cease to refine and invent methods of this kind. Until one day, using these methods, I managed to grasp the object with descending forceps, as will be described at the end of this chapter; after which I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, without any defect in him for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning behind what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor are they comprehended by the free ones.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little about motion; and with that which is present about that which is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And thus I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they entered; or by the contrary action of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled by the place into which it entered, or is an arrow penetrating flesh and then being thrust in and out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the impulse of the hour in which it entered, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey your impulse, then leave it for a few days and apply attraction and motion on any day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then you should know that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at that bone from any part moving subtly where the place is enlarged by the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already pierced one of the brain ventricles, and appears in the wound after some days, as those accidents which you and others call them, then abstain from removing the arrow and leave it where its being will be equated for some days; or if the arrow reaches the brain, then death is not prolonged to him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone of the body only and does not pass into the brain, but remains in the wound for some days, and you do not suffer any of those accidents from it, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly lodged and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and proceed to cure the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area carefully, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot extract it due to the thickness of the flesh and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins, then you cut into the flesh where it can be expanded and where the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you excise the flesh in which it is embedded as much as possible with all the skill you can; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears or in their torsion where compliance is required.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use the grip of your hand with forceps at all parts where it makes that comply; and with subtle skill ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easier for its extraction and for that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at that time of your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then return to that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it makes contrary evil flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And keep your virtue in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engen in every manner for the evasion of the arrow; and do this with facility, tranquility, and tardiness as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And do this to contract the arrow by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for it is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are redirected contrary to the other part, or that you have already treated some part of them on the external parts, or cause obstruction in the tip of the arrow by the sensation of the part more superior to the arrow's base; then you dry over that; and the drying should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light by displacement.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist the ligament according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and gradually enlarge it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, let that remain for a few days, and then repeatedly apply it to where it hurts.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft is embedded and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is stubborn, create a concavity with your finger so that between the concavity of the wound and the arrow's head, then push it into place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it with strong pressure into place, as the arrow will expand due to this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you indent all the flesh where it entered, if possible, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it while it is dry, take care not to injure a vein or nerve, and after closing the wound, treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends be curved like the mouth of an ass, so that they can grasp the arrow and not let it slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of these forceps are made special kinds, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the condition of the wound.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave end of this extremity is made like the cleft of an ass so that it can ease the removal of the arrow and pushes the deaf one out.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, so that it may be alleviated for the instrument in the concave groove and is pushed towards that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of femoral venous puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Of femoral venous puncture. The veins from which it is customary to perform phlebotomy are the femoral veins, which are located in chapter XVI, and they consist of two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are prominently visible on the temples; and two veins under the eyes, called aspients; one vein in the middle part of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic —; and there are two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are punctured in the brachial region are five; of these, one is cephalic, and is from the wild basilisk; and the people call it "the vein of the head," but it is sorda, a midline vein, composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call this one by the people "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic basilisk and is called "citillary," and the vulgar call it "the vein of the belly"; one from the funis of the arm, which is placed on the axilla, and it is this in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is this that appears above the armpit by its obvious appearance; salvatella, which is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller said, and it is in it two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer's neck; and the second is sophena, and its place is given in the thigh of the domestic deer; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given in the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrh, migraines, meningitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sanguine in those veins is as I will recount to you: it should be drawn from above the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are with a wide cloth for good friction; then strongly hold the patient by their neck with a band through which the two locations near the ears appear in two pressed areas of the head; and you should take that from what I said, and if you feel the pulse of those at your own wrist, here it is tried.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be used for incision, and insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand to the vein and its parts above, and cut the vein with an incision inclined upwards.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then sprinkle powder and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book about the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries, which supply the temple with blood for the femoral venesection, is the ancient and evil emigranea (likely a misspelling or variant of "hemigranea," meaning one-sided headache) and continuous cataract and body full of acute effusions in the heels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on these is as I will recount to you: tightly bind the patient's thigh with a ligature until the two veins appear clearly by touch and the pulse of their location is demonstrated by your finger; then you can proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the codena above the vein at the parts above as you have just indicated, and insert the fleubotomi incidently, and raise the vein in them; and cut that as you did with the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the compression of the thigh, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a compress and powder there with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And then the recollection of the wound, and after that the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the treatment of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is similar to the bleeding from the cephalic vein for ancient illnesses of the face, and for headaches, inflammation, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bleeding from the vein is as I will recount to you; it is that the patient tightens his thigh with a bandage where the vein appears; and then take the instrument, which is called a fosseri, the form of which is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the point which is at the top of the outlet over that vein and strike it either from above or according to the manner of the limb, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation in the patient and strengthen it so that it may heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases, the space is opened with a large incision for bloodletting, but I do not know if the bloodletting incision should be of acute extremity as with other bloodlettings, it should rather be of lateral extremity, and cut transversely, because the bone is close by and strong; cutting the bloodletting incision would likely break the bone when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More importantly, the young vessels that are at the inner corners of the eyes through the skin of the eye by inflammation and swelling in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient strengthens his own column with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting, while you stand over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the incision for venesection according to the transverse length a little, making only a few venesections, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the venesection is fine, firmly secure the extremity of it.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood run until it is as necessary for you, pause over those cuts, and strengthen them with a new bandage, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More so, the incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and severe toxicity, as well as maladies of the face such as migraines and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the incision for it is that the patient supports his head with his left hand, and you take the fine long venesection and place it in the middle location of the nasal cavity according to the correct direction, for the vein does not appear here, and thus the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover your hand with the venesection little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then remove it after a night, for that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the femoral incision lead to a constriction of the leg and a beginning of leprosy and various illhealths and bad ulcers corrosive like herpotromeno.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels intense pain in his thigh; and the surgeon is over the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually incise the vein along its length for a femoral incision, making it wider little by little; and extract the blood according to the season in quantity or according to what is necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And gradually remove the lint and strengthen the two veins with a midwifery thread so that the patient does not become overheated, and leave within the flesh until the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the youth of the femoral incision for algiric veins, apply to small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and those bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the groin, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then turn the labia and look at two veins, one on the right side of the labia and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so is found in the circuit of those small dark veins; and then cut each with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if doubt exists, you, and you do not know which is which among them, then proceed with the incision of the larger one, and the more obvious one among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper labia.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is customarily better to cut both veins that are in the lower labia.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And of the two veins that are in the lower labia, the treatment for the tongue's benefit is close to the femoral incision at positions that are in the scrotum, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of performing a flebotomy is to follow the patient's leg in front of their groin, elevate the tongue of the leg, and observe the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform a flebotomy on each; and make sure that you do not end the flebotomy on those, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the crease are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the flebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either place a small mirtilo or olive stick subtlety; or perform a surgical flebotomy with a lancet, and call it alnessil. This is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is to incise and of those specific shallow, subtle cuts according to the width of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of flebotomy with mirtilo:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the wound be as you see, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of large visible branches, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method for phlebotomy for an olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this femoral incision is of lesser width and more delicate extremity, and it suits the femoral veins that contain subtle citrine pus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	And the youth of the femoral incision from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the blood from the bad illnesses that affect the knee and the foot, and from what taints the leg and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it suits the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be well aware of it and to be overly cautious, for if he errs in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood, so that it is necessary to ensure that you do not phlebotomize there before cutting as with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you should leave that and change to another, or search for some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and do phlebotomy with a lancet there as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want the femoral flebotomy, proceed in front of the stricture of the thigh where you feel the location of the pulse, then place your hand on it to hold; then lift the thigh and make a concave incision along the vein as we have said before; be careful that you do not percuss too much over some space of the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you press, as you tighten the ligament, inflammation occurs in the location where you held it with your hand, then that inflammation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the femoral flebotomy as it does from a child's wound, thin and rapid, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; then compress and hold your hand over that area for a long space; near this hold your hand, and if the blood is divided, four or five drops are divided, then strengthen the thigh and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from the moccio of the wound, and have no fear of it, but do not wet that for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not stop, and sometimes you must not perform this for lack of present medicine; then when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is constricted and the blood is stopped; or take some from your fist, and do that, and take half and strengthen that over the place of the vein at strictura descent with liament and powder between on another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	But if the blood is stopped, that is good; and if not, then cure that with what preceded in the remembrance of the place of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood in such small areas is difficult due to the size of the wound and the possibility of applying powder from the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part that will ascend to the head and from the part left below the body; for this is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the incision after the phlebotomy where it is over-tremor in the phlebotomy of him; for that one is a nerve; and then if he adjusts at the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, there will be stupor to him, and it is difficult the healing of him, and not strong he is healed completely. This nerve motions sometimes appear in sensation; and if it is hidden at some men and is subtle and is not shown, then cover the phlebotomy that you make by section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve by your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw the blood from the head and relieve the ailments of the heels.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And cover this properly, if you want to make the phlebotomy puncture at the olive phlebotomy or at the mirti phlebotomy; for it is the safe place of all veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve are found there.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, however, you should perform the incision carefully, ensuring that you do not puncture the upper part of the vein, but rather locate the area slightly lower, and do not mark it, unless it is easily accessible by percussion just before the incision site.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, however, an abscess is often found in some people, when it is not lanced in the first percussion, then do not mark it again with a lance.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the incision and the accidents related to it are matters that you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that an incision should be made only to maintain health and with hope for its successful outcome, and with caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses. And that the incision should be made on one of the veins that are in the thigh: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the incision should be made at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before eating, when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a femoral incision should be made and on the seventh day or at the first hour of the next day, three hours should have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more frequent the femoral incision is administered, the more it should be done when it proves convenient and necessary, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let a boy not be circumcised before he has four years, and a girl that is pregnant should not be circumcised but only in the fourth month before the seventh. And women should not be circumcised those which have passed forty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when anyone wants to be circumcised for any reason, let them modify their intestines before the circumcision by applying a lion's suppository, if there is an obstructed wound, so that the veins do not carry superfluous fluid during the circumcision of the intestines, which are purified and do not affect the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let no patients who are seasick, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or drunkenness be circumcised until they have fully recovered from such conditions. Nor those suffering from dropsy. Circumcision should be more feared near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal issues, near the multiplication of coitus and work and exercise after fasting or watching over, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, either corporeally or spiritually.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some reason that the wound may be subtletized.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so when it is around the hour of three, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be protected on that day from all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil and excessive labor, copulation, and things similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her service, have ready the causes in the use of which custom dictates the presence of aromatics and odors, and balms according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the scalpel two or three times; then tie the thread with a strap and wrap that area two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tempered, that is, when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is due to mollification, and then prohibit the body's release of blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the stricture is near, have those who are to perform the incision rub their hands together between them as the veins become swollen and clearly discernible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And when the scalpel is about to make the incision, apply a little antiseptic oil properly to it; then place your left hand's index finger on the vein, positioning the location for the incision so that the vein slightly expands and becomes more evident. The incision should be made where you find the vein similar to a fleeing cord, as this area is full of venosity. When you pause the incision over that area, the vein contracts, and the scalpel reveals its position. If the incision does not open the vein, it should be tightened; if it opens, the incision is correct.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, one must ensure that the phlebotomist is fixed and stimulated in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then place the phlebotomy, but if the vein is not opened in one pass, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this or another pass, letting that area a little more, or over it apply warmth, if the area is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is infected, or the patient faints, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, for it would force the infection out through the wound, nor immerse it in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the vein is thinly situated, and you fear that it may not yield enough blood, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust based on the appearance. Do so with warmth before the area becomes infected, for an infected area requires less bloodletting.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not operate on it, for no excuse would serve your cause; instead, place yourself over some part of the wound, for it alleviates the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, in all phlebotomies where the veins are cut to prevent blood from flowing back into the body, administer oil as a substitute. They use tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes subtle and is circulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess forms in the phlebotomy site, where motas (blisters) occur, especially for those who have not been bled recently but during this session, or near the appearance of the small vein, then you should apply and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, strongly maintaining it for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure to do this near the termination of the vein with the help of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any blackness or greenishness in the area for a few days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over that area some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or vinegar or its semblance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when red spots occur, you should perform a bloodletting of the basilicus vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If at that time you find it soft, apply your compress to that area, as this swelling is bad and harmful; then be sure to place over it some cause of what we have said, for much fluid will flow from the femoral artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, so that the area may become harder, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And ensure that you draw from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood according to how it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, let it remain until it is resolved; similarly, if you see it thick, let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is sharp, let its acuteness subside.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when one is full and strong and has the need for a single session of bloodletting, then enlarge the incision in the vein and let the bleeding be free.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when one is weak, do the opposite, and let out the blood in several sessions, and that it be gradual.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venous bloodletting is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting avoids the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is more commendable and safer than bloodletting according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which it is accustomed to occur syncope, before the bloodletting, place a small amount of powder infused in milkweed or simple oxymel; and let out the blood from the arm in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a swelling or complication, before the bloodletting, take a powder of myrrh in oil or an aromatic honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sweet-root, or an aromatic and fragrant honey syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you happen to encounter a fainting fit, perform a femoral incision, as it is caused by the cessation of vital blood flow. Then cause him to drink water from meat and essence of a subtle fragrant substance; use aromatic substances like almond oil, and anoint his foot with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter on fainting fit for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, perform a femoral incision on him, as the purpose of which is for gradual evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wants to cool his arm and circulate his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral incision.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wants to direct the blood from his body in the opposite direction of which it is flowing, then do this after it has been cooled on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that body in which there is hot blood already inflamed causes fever, ensure that the blood is expelled all at once and in large quantity, and intensify the perception so that a syncope does not occur before; yet you must have preserved all conditions for phlebotomy; and placing your hand on the pulse of the patient, drain the body of blood, so that it does not end in death instead of syncope, since many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to separate the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the venous orifices are already closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that with great force and slightly extend it, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it until the phlebotomy is performed again; or wait for the coagulation of the blood in the venous orifices due to the acuity of the phlebotomy; or place your hand on a part of tyriaca alfarach or sagzenea, and keep it with light compression until the blood has settled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the scab accordingly, and there is no excuse, then you let it flow to that location or to the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And when the vein called "funis del bras" is cannulated instead of the funica or basilica, which is composed of those, if they are not easily found or hidden.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of cannulating that vein is that the surgeon inserts his hand in cold water when the dilated vein becomes clearly apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is tightened around that with liament to prevent migration; and then cannulate according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor in terms of length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and let your cannulation be in the place where you cannulate that vein near the wrist of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you are to stop the flow of blood, then immerse your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you are in the days of summer, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead stop the flow of blood in the body during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the radial wrist vein is related to the ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you strengthen your hand with an amulet or with your own hand, rather than keeping it in trailing water, until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; then quickly make the transverse incision; and if you cut through it completely, no harm will come of it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And make sure that you do not place your hand over the fistula, for leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in the running water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse that area in the running water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not completely constricted; similarly, ensure that you do this in all similar cases.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Moreover, for the care of the fistula from the left hand, it is important to address the diseases of the liver.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the fistula of the foot as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the care of the femoral vein in the fistula is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as liver diseases, and retention of menstruation, as well as diseases of hernias and old chest ulcers, and their similar cases of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his leg in cold water and makes friction thereupon through which the veins appear; and over the joint of the leg he places a cord; and at the location of the vein he cuts it apparently, and from there its ramifications on the face of the leg multiply.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus perform the femoral incision wider if you must cut the cord, and at the location cut the addition of it, which is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the femoral incision on the face of the leg, then you must guard the nerves that are left on the face of the leg, and place your incision over the location where you make it transverse, as if you were going to excise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the letting of the blood is prohibited; then you wet the leg in cold water and let the blood flow there as it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the incision by the ligger is incorrect in the first attempt, then retry the incision there a little more, for the area is salt; and do not fear its mischief, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make the incision on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said before, you should leave the tendon of the calf with the wild artery.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the pain from the ligation of the sciatic vein is in the hip when it is due to cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the ligation of the sciatic vein is that the patient enters the bath, strengthens, and tightens his thigh with a long thin bandage over the tendon above four fingers, for it does not appear any other way.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then ligate that one according to whatever skill is at your disposal and according to the transversal, which is better. Or incise that one with an incision or excise that one with excision, for the location of the vein is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often improved by a slight incision; and if you find it but does not appear in the feeling altogether, then perform a flebotomy on some branch of it, and that which appears at the second interphalangeal joint instead of the thumb and little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And return the structure and place your hand over the site of the flebotomy firmly, so that it heals slightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilation is of corns, or of ears, or of eyes.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other way is through ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And at the vertices where bloodletting and extraction of abscesses are administered, there are four locations of the body, of which one where the vertices are paused is on the occipital region, and is the last part of the head; and the second location is in half of the neck; and abscesses from the chin leave the jaw behind and then the mouth; and abscesses from two spatulas; and abscesses from alohoster, which are above the end of the coccyx; and abscesses from two forks, each being two inches; and abscesses from two cervices; and abscesses from two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bloodletting should not extract the abscess but from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this does not lose its virtue through those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion where the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes bloodletting for an illness or during its continuance, we should administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in men where blood is multiplied during digestion due to the extraction of wind and they find great weight and hardness on their head; and among those who find fullness and redness on their face and head, and on their neck; and among those who find pain on their face and forehead with darkness and drowsiness on their eyes; and among those who feel the place of wind extraction; and among those whose laughter is multiplied; and among those who find taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue swells and they spit blood; and among those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood during sleep as redness, spots, and other causes like theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when times occur in any of those causes, and precisely if it is in the third or fourth day, then command the extraction of wind to be done more than two or three hours passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the extraction of wind from the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and to what is embedded in the eyes; more important is that this be near the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this phlebotomy is at the location of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that which causes pain or inflammation, or in which there is a cold, as it would cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those of the elderly, in whose heads there are gouty affections.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But more so for those who have continuous pain in them; and for this reason, you should command the phlebotomist to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More phlebotomy of alkehel is at the location of the femoral and basilic veins: and for this reason, it contributes to asthma, and to the constriction of blood vessels and to the rupture of the vessel walls, and to coughing, and to congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is recommended to slightly warm the alkehel phlebotomy, for if it is left cold, it will weaken the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of algodon confers on headaches and eye pain, migraines, fever, and toothaches; it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And make sure you command the attendant not to press too hard at the incision so as not to injure the artery and disrupt the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the application of heat leaves the chin relieved of alcohol in the mouth, and of gingival corruption, and takes on a semblance to the ailments that are in the mouth, and are in place of phlebotomy of alheric that is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the application of heat made over two spoons confers on cachapatan, which is done by restoring temperature.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the application of heat to the two internal parts of the thighs confers youth like phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, femoral, and cephalic. For that attracts the blood from all those veins, more numerous that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the fan to blow not towards the incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave the nerves and arteries alone.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a fan that blows on the thighs, and apply it to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers, but leave them alone.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure you command the fan to be a large one, made of wool, for the area needs strong dryness; and keep the incised areas separate from the incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More fans for the thighs diminish by manifest diminution, for they carry the scum from all over the body, and relieve old pains in the hips and the liver, and of the bladder; and induce menstruation, and relieve both pain and swelling; and stand in place of a bloodletting on two sophenas, and halberds, and of two calves.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they also thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the fans, the halberds are similar to the fans of the two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the fomentations is that you place the fomentation at the beginning widely and apply by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the fomentations, but pause those lightly, and remain those frequently, and that the humors come to the area by chance equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until the area is already reddening and swelling, and the redness of the sore appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and repeat the suction little by little, and meanwhile consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If the person has tender flesh due to cold, ensure that you incise only once and then stop, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fomentation person to enlarge the incision slightly, and increase the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the sore there is pus, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for the pus and the moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second concerning the thorough examination of the removal of the large bowels.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the bowels are motile and fatty, then a scarification should be done on the third day so that it may heal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the bowels little by little or a small amount, suffice us a single scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract motile bowels, we make a single deep scarification; and if we know that the bowels are large, then we must perform a longitudinal scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the cut only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the cut is large, hard, dark, and its edges are straight, then the areas for the suction cups should be anointed gradually, openly, and thoroughly; if it is in summer, then use olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or two-part olive oil or balsam of copaiba; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or olive oil of lily, or chamomile oil, or bowel oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of wormwood, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or cedar oil, and in their likeness.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the wind is of ample ports and has much flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places of winds near the ventilation let them be washed with warm water or with cold water of soladrum, or water of cohoba, or water of bordeola, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that of which the scab is due to moist humidity, wash its winds with wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that of which the excesses are large, wash its winds with old wine, or water of santisc (which is marigold), or decoction of cedar, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be ensured that the ventilation is protected before bathing; having this, it should be administered immediately after bathing for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done that the wind-dispeller and blood-letting be performed before ventilation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When you consider the beginning: when the patient who needs to be phlebotomized or is choleric and has sharp pain and inflammation, then you should take causes that cool down, such as acetic milgrains, endive in vinegar, laxatives, julep, and their like.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as lentils, pigeon meat, and well-seasoned dishes, and those like them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those with colic, give them to drink syrup of fennel or syrup made from seeds, saffron, and wine flavored with migdal between vintage and non-vintage; they should be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like lentils, hemp, pheasant, dove, and pigeon.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And ensure that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, their drinking is greater than their food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink in some hours for some men hellebore, or medicines of musk, so as musk, or acelita before ventilation or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound be subtle; and one should not apply heat to it.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the ventilation that is his scarification be ventilation passed over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the side of the broad ligament; for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not wanted for them but an abscess of the member's wound, as with ventilation over the breast in illness of flux of blood from the breasts; we use it so that the concretion near the viscera of the member may be dissolved, as with ventilation over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for it rarifies the member and draws it out and relieves the pain by dissolving the congestion.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied over the hemorrhoids when accidents occur in their prolapse or perforation, for by virtue of its strength, the horehound eliminates the prolapse and eradicates the perforation from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when it is placed on the liver and spleen, one should relieve distension in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these distensions are administered sometimes with suction alone; and sometimes with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of clear water in the diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the distension should be full and quite large, so it should be clear water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the distension administered with heat: let the width of the orifices be two digits, as we have formed them; and the amount of the probe be half a palm; and it should be in the middle of it, in the location that is in the circuit, one-third of its size, I take it to be small according to the amount that an needle enters into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of ointment of oak or citrus, thick and strong, equal and smooth so that it does not lead the limb to deviate from its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place a candle at the middle of the patient's thigh, either of wood or iron, where it is placed on the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this larger cup be greater than the one we have used; and according to the illness and the condition of him who uses it, let there be a small amount.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cups for children and those who are weak are different from the cups used for young and pregnant women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cup on the limb is to extend the skin over the fire of decently sized wooden charcoal, and place a small wax candle at the middle of the thigh transversely in the middle of the cup, so that the fire is ignited around the placed part to prevent the body of the patient from burning.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And place it over the limb of the patient, and let the fire be placed as we have said, such that when we have the cups and do not need them to remain on the limb and to avoid burning the skin with the vapor above that fire, then the cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of ventosa (cupping) used for the illness of pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for as long as necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members where the position of cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the palate and similar parts; or in a limb devoid of flesh, such as the nose and ears and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be sanguissuguas in the boiled and purified hot water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be laid in warm water until they are softened, and no cause of inflammation in their abdomen; then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with venesection and fomentations; then rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; then place them over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, apply suction to the area with a fomentation, it is more effective in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with warm water and apply cold water; then rub and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the blood is prolonged to the site of the sanguissuguas, and this is where they accumulate, then you insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the exudation subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol trissat, or powders similar to those of the styptics, over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place hot compresses made from fava beans on the area, and let them remain until the beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent bleeding occurred or insert a needle in the areas that retain blood; and place them there until the bleeding stops when felt.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, powder the area with a little aloes triphala, or salt, or ashes, and apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the proceedings of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that this chapter is known by the doctors, the vulgar practitioners, and those who for a time have not reviewed the free works of the Ancients nor read even one letter of them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during all that time; and I have not acquired this knowledge through any other means, but solely through the long study of the works of the Ancients and the study over them to extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct my experience and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and about which I have passed my experience; here I abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from long occupation; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and show this at the end of declaration; and form this into the shapes of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Sum up and collect the essential points regarding fractures of bones, those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recall of various types of bone fractures and their specifics.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and those chapters that are necessary for the understanding at the beginning must be well understood by the craftsmen and based on the truth of those. It is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting, when you approach the beginning for a flebotomy or to remove that, or anything else at the same time, if no cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or it is to whom this occurs, or old age in decrepitude, or it is time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And therefore it is well to eat herbs and fowl meats and crab; and prohibit gross meats and full meals of food and all food that fills the veins with phlegm; among which you must be careful of abscess, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of the disease.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods rich in both moisture and substance, with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, beans, fresh meat, and similar substantial foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly and honey is used.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones crack in those men who are in the prime of life and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuous and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs, and those that are of them in the end of childhood, thus like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and moderates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which it thickens and adheres, uniting them together, bringing about the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, in which no cause prevents it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the hand bone; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I renew my memory of all species of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A great diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures in bones are diversified; for some are caused by an arc-shaped fracture or one that occurs at the stellate structures; and some are caused according to the length of the bone: such as the transverse fractures of the flat bones, the oblique fractures, and the comminuted fractures, proceeding or not proceeding from a direct blow, just as when a pen is prepared to write, there can be a fracture by a slice or disruption in the head, or a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species, there is a specific method of restoration according to the memory that will be renewed in its own place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this it is known that a bone is fractured: there is curvature of it, and an elevation and prominence of it upon touch, and its pain when you apply pressure to it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is neither apparent curvature nor pain, you should touch the area with movement and if the patient does not experience great pain, it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is curvature or a small fracture, for which you should touch it with your hand and apply compression all around; then place your hand over the area where there is remembrance of the medicine at that moment, which agrees with the location; and it will be straightened by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And perceive that the area when it is curved and not split into two or more parts as does not happen in inflammation, for which you should begin your correction of it having an abscess form with a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs in him, let that be left for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and piercing of it are lighter than the part in which you have incised.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the recall of the remedy that will come.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you have incised, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in such a way that you equalize the member according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those additions with skill and according to any method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that no harm comes to the patient through your operation causing pain or injury; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations or create contraction in the member, as we have seen through their improper operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, maintain equilibrium and a proper operation and strictures of that member, with rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them avoid causing it during the hour of their vigilance and sleep, observing its revolution and agitation, and directing all its movements by your entire virtue; wait until the position of the member is in a position where the pain is assured, which is caused when it is in the disposition of the position of the member in pain or injury; then ensure that you change it to another disposition where it does not feel pain; and guard this so that the position itself is straight and equal, to prevent the member from undergoing tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is what I recommend; so that you may know that the broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, make sure that the wrapping is of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, make sure that the wrapping is broad and firm, so that the bandage binds the large and strong limb evenly in all parts around the fracture, ensuring that no mark enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after your first application of the bandage, firmly tie it conveniently around that, over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps according to the limb's need; and firmly hold your hand a little on the tying.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part above the location of the fracture, and make sure that your bandage is as strong as the one you tightened around the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually extend the covering around the fracture site a little, and gradually relax the tension little by little, while you support the area with a significant portion of your hand.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the damaged area over the covering, and gradually bring the coverings to the part of the fracture; and let your operation on the tension of the covering and in relaxing it according to what we said in the first covering above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stopa or cloth bandage between the coverings so that it matches the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually match it with these properly made star-shaped coverings as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area; otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the star-shaped coverings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And the splints of the leg should be well made; or of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and the width of each splint according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the splint placed over the fracture is thicker and a bit longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to what is read in proportion to the member's size; then strengthen with another bandage according to your first straightening; and tie decently on top according to what we said about straightening, and it should be your straightening more at the location of the fracture, and the more extended from the fracture, the less the straightening.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the wires are medium in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; if the wires are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used the threads of strings for suturing, it is a great error when the straightening is not at equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And such thin wires are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the straightening with them that you want, and it must not be that there is less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is affected by the extremities of the vessels near the stricture in those areas, then place those of stopa leon or fine woolen cloth between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are by plucking, and accidents of disruption in the chain, and I will come to recall that in the Capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for all broken members, they are not straightened by vessels on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be held still on vessels but after about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied to fractures and dislocations.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering as an opening for the restoration of fractures, convenient for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from a powder of molinum, which is the medulla of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you should bind it thus tightly, but sieve the white wheat flour through it, and make the binding neither too thick nor too thin; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains: prepare a paste with asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, garlic, and myrrh, which is extracted from salvamar (a type of salvager plant), in drachms; myrrh and gum acacia each in drachms 5; alcohol in drachms 20; all should be sifted and mixed with alcohol water or wheat flour if the wound is superficial; then use this paste, which is of good composition, to restore slightly broken bones and apply it to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way to prepare a paste that helps with fractures and sprains: use myrrh and 10 drachms of white althea; use gum acacia in 5 drachms and Armenian bole in 20 drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be ground in a mortar with a pestle, sifted, and mixed with water or wheat flour and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method to plaster joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidents in those areas as well as cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in vinegar and cured oil and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is not the virtue of restoration, but rather to cauterize and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a brief plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the swelling from an abscess: take root of hyssop, chamomile, flowers of violets, bran of barley; all in equal parts; mix them all together and steep them in vinegar, if the limb is not scabbed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scabbed, then soften it with water of fennel steeped or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolution when the abscess is hard, during the restoration of the limb: take rhubarb, seed of flax, balsam, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and ground; all should be macerated and then pressed with water of sorrel or water mixed or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Icras not place it freely on the limb soaked for the restoration of it, but make a plaster of wax and oil only; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia be seen as applied on the broken limb for the restoration of it and in the cases where the drying is of small quality such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar to those causes we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of mint, bark of cut human skin or pen of hare, herb of althea, and salt; macerate and sieve them, then press and make into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When the quantity according to which it is necessary to cut the ligature and then disjointed, you should consider if no pain has occurred nor any pricking nor is the bone broken not dislocated, then you do not disjoint for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain occurs intensely or pricking or inflammation at the site, then you should cut or disjoint it immediately, and apply a plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sponge of the sea, both wet, submerge that in brine water, and apply it to the area until the pricking and pain are alleviated; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, cover it with wool soaked in olive oil or rubbed oil, and keep it on overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and let the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeatedly apply that fine plaster and do not strengthen your initial bandage too much, but keep it subtle until it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess, the inflammation, the pain, and all the symptoms are already well healed, and there is a need for poultice and stricture, then you repeat it as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs in the member of any of those we have said, then you do not loosen it but for about three days or four, or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the stricture more than in your first stricture, and adjust it to the swelling of the food in the stomach, according to whether the memory of it precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that nutrition cannot reach there; therefore, wet that area completely with clear water all day long; do this for three days; and loosen the stricture a little, and through this operation, bring the nutrition to the member, and it will be healed slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than what the leaf restorers do a second time when the member fracture is not restored to the beginning, according to its place, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises, and if they were correct this would enlarge the Ancients in their books and would warn against doing such work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol according to: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, where the blow breaks the bone completely at the fracture site, leaving the bone as if split in wood, and for this reason, this type is named "ascial"; or the blow affects some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not reaching the marrow; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that grates or rubs; its cause is percussion upon the foot or setting in place.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, nearly reaching the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture, it is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like structure, and for this reason, this species of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is caused by setting or percussion of the foot, similar to which, it causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave area, as happens with clay pots when they are percussed, and it is a part of their breaking into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And more commonly, this occurs in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And in all these species of closed fractures, they are thus treated as if by separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come to the recollection of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these species of fracture by detection of them and by inquiry of their appearance and the corruption of flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known because it is discovered upon the bone, is cleaned, and limits upon it by touch, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the signs of illness, and if you see by these signs that it signifies a manifest indication of fear, such as vomiting of colic, extension, loss of understanding, suppression of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the extremities and heat of those areas, and signs similar to them in major dispositions, then you should doubt that it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see uncommon signs, you hope for healing, and then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the injury has come to you at the beginning as an injury and this is during the days of winter, then when you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then when you examine the bone before the seventh day, have in mind that what is left of the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the putrefaction covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces, then you should incise the fractured part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And when you incise the thigh of the injured patient, uncover over the bone according to custom and your method as is possible based on the figure of the injury, and let it be light over the wound.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter difficulty in detecting the bone, flows of pus or abscesses, then you should apply pressure to it as is appropriate, and fill the area with cloths soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure of the flow of pus; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and in its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the tissue straight down, and this is its form: Then administer another incisor here, a little further laterally; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And administer more with the incisor further laterally than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And ensure that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and should be at the rear of their extremities in sharpness, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors, so that the head does not tremble and guide it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the tissue is strong and hard, then you must perforate in its circumference before administering the incisors with the superficial cuts, which you call shallow cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And thus they are named so only when those do not pause at the end of the bone where it is close to it, for so that during travel there is a round extremity or margin above that upon which the head of the bone is left acute resembling a small margin or circle, which you must prohibit from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these travels a great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, ensuring that when present in all parts of the skull, the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the travel on the bone and rotate it within those tongs until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then, return the travel to another location, placing there what was between them to carry the quantity of the size of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the incisore in that which is between each part of the bone, and make that pus subtle that you can over it at the end of levity, as we have said, while excavating the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as fine tongs and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the chest.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And since you have circled the perforated bone, and separated it from the chest if it is continuous with it, and have extracted that part, make sure to scrape and smooth that area with a roughness similar to that of the bone but finer than other scalpel blades.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find any small part of the ribs displaced, then reduce it using the tool we have mentioned for the instruments; and subsequently apply a salve to the wound and dress the area as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Diyssec Gualia and cuts it with great caution; this is his saying: At the beginning, you must begin by uncovering the part of the bone at the location where the fracture is most severe and most obvious. When you have uncovered that part, pause and use the end of this scalpel, which is slow and cheerful in its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lenticular part is lion and does not incide any cause, and the acute part is divided into two halves lengthwise, as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cusp at the face of it incident acutely on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small hammer between which you have incised the whole bone as it is rotated, and you be sure of the panniculus that it does not accede in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the medicant14 was the purest leaf of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if any additional cause affects the bone of the panniculus in some places of the bone, incise that part at the extremity of the incisor lenticular, and deliver that part which is facilitated, for it is delivered from its noxious and fearful aspects.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is abscessed or left of the bone is its face, and remains in it asperities and subtle fibrils, then scrape that asperity and eradicate those fibrils with sharp instruments which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer from them the most convenient parts for that broken bone and the figure of it.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And ensure that you apply with your reason the os at the beginning to the fat of those razors, and then use closely beneath it the thin pus, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the thin pus of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small fractures or subtle fractures, ensure that you apply care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is because it is not complicated for those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place this on what we have written about in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is torn when you extract the bone, then you should take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge that in olive oil rubbed with rose water, and place that over the wound opening; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth, submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place that over the first piece. Do this gently on top of that without pressing too hard. Then apply a poultice of honey over that, and do not press it except with the amount that the wound has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that point for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and apply medicines to which superfluous dryness is needed, such as linen lint and err seed flour, powder of enisetum and aristology, and similar.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make of these medicines a powder that is finely sifted over the wound, such as being dry; generally, apply all medicine to which it cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And preserve it according to its virtue so that the wound in your cure be clean; do not let there be surdicia of ointment or other in it; nor allow virulence to aggregate in it; for when it is applied over the cervele (brain) cloth, it corrupts that and spoils it, and you will injure the patient with this malignant evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you will injure the scalp of the head, as it is modified by the bone and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and there is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider whether injury to the patient has occurred as we have said the accidents, know that it is harmful indeed and do all possible to avoid it.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness occurs only due to the medicine that is applied above, and it is caused by that medicine, then take part of honey and part of rubbed oil in equal parts, and line a cloth with those lines, and place it over the scab; and cure it with the species of healing that you deem appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol. iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose that is broken, but two parts together with some superfluous tissue above them, or one of those few layers, because in the nose there are two bones. The part that remains is cartilaginous and not broken; hence, you do not injure it, but rather apply friction, tortuosity, and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the small bone into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your finger, and externally with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this is done for your convenience, and ensure that you do not aggravate the pain in the sick person's thigh during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and cannot reach there, then you should treat it at the end of the nasal bone where there is a swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply this on the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, soon after the seventh or eighth day, you should rest the apostema with a cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of linen cloth at the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two slips of leather, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the slip of leather has such a swelling as to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the leather strips should be impregnated with balsam, and used throughout the day. But this is not what I see; instead, you should ensure that the cloth is soaked in balsam of Hungary and powdered alum; and leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes gout is in the nose, instead of the foot, due to cold wrapping around with lion's skin cloth; and you have already fractured the nose very severely so that breathing is not prohibited.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or with a hot cloth in water and olive oil, or with a diaphyllum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no abscess occurs, when you need to apply a plaster externally use sesame meal and powder of crushed cinnamon in honey; then place your hand on the patient's lion skin, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nose bones are fractured or comminuted, when you need to split those, extract them with instruments suitable for those; then close the incision, and treat it with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters appropriate for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If a plague occurs inside the nose, then cure that with cold waters and administer lead cans (a type of nasal irrigation) when they are all healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, not completely fractured into two parts, but bent inward in places. In this case, the pain is mild.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger. Push the gelatinous substance of the fracture inward with ease towards the parts outside, using your other hand on the part outside of the bone; do this gently until it is in place.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the correct alignment, so that their equilibrium can be restored.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter a toothache with a fracture, then strengthen those of which you fear will break along the line of gold or silver or lead; and place a cerot on the broken jaw, and place a cloth duplicate, and a large star-shaped bandage properly made, or a piece equal to the length of the jaw; and lift it above according to how the wound is dressed and what you consider appropriate for application, provided that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place a lion's flesh broth on his wound.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has already changed in any way, then on the seventh day, you should remove it. Then correct what has already changed in him and plaster that area with powder of wheat, chalk of alum, or flour of cinnamon, after you have removed the cerot from him, and place lion's wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once this plaster is properly applied and the bone's position has not changed, leave it as it is, without removing it until he is healed, and strengthen the fracture; for marks of this fracture will close in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said repeatedly in the treatment of it until it is healed, and cure that boil.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is open, then consider whether it is a bad separation of the bone or displaced, then you carefully adjust those displacements as needed for the removal of those from the bones.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are stretched, then you enlarge them with the flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you have adjusted those displacements and they will no longer be reduced, enlarge the openings of the wound if it is large; otherwise, place over that one of the plasters that suit and cover it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Repeatedly, when the furcula is broken in the front part, the fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, or separated, or split into two parts without reaching the joints; and it is easy to restore; or as when accidents occur in the joints, and restoration is difficult; or as when the fracture is open.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is open, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the leg with that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then adjust the fracture with the pins called entry points so that the shape of the bone is restored according to its natural form, and do not leave it in a depression or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then take a pin or wick made of cloth or wool, of the size according to your need; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pin between your fingers while adjusting the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the furcula to the outer parts because it is caught in the preon, then you should turn the foot over its ankle, and place a medium-sized cushion on the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that of the furcula bone be elevated as in the presacral region, and then you align the fracture and set it at the sites said.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel the branches of the furcula and they are tender, then cut there and remove those branches with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision in it with one of the scalpel blades which you have prepared for this, after placing your hand on the furcula to hold the cautery; and that cautery is made of wood or iron, of which this is the shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it have two ends thus as you see, and one end should be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound rupture which you have incised when you have extracted the suture from the bone is large, and you are certain of an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suturing.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound rupture is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you encounter an abscess, then stuff a cloth with vinegar and rose oil, and place it over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	For the fracture of the bone when it is a large wound and section, you pause with a plaster made of flour mixed with honey, place it over the lion's stopper, and then place the bell over it, if needed. Take one of the Sarrazin reeds that are long and have a width of about one palm; place powders in the center of the plaster and the stopper; take a thin table reed whose width is three fingers and similarly in length; wrap this reed in cloth, then wrap the cloth around the reed over the location of the fracture; pause with salves as they are poured out, and roll the cloth over the neck of the reed and leave its tip exposed, leaving a portion of the patient's flesh visible. Continue to apply until the bone is well set, ensuring that this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, provided that the splint is not too tight over the broken bone; so that you can examine the wound daily, when the dressing becomes soft or see the splint has loosened, then adjust it and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient to sleep with the head elevated on a pillow, and place another cushion under the neck so that when he sleeps at night it is slightly raised. This raises the support for the injured area, and thus elevates the fracture of the furcula along with the elevation of the muscle; or the arm hangs down by the side of the patient.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the dressing unless there is an abscess or suppuration in the same place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And renew the poultice if you see that it is changing, and adjust the support and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to be fully restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the case in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some cases it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Shoulder blade is broken in the middle of the location and not broken of it but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the location is broken — and it is broken in the middle of its location — and is not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the area powder of ground honey and stop parsley; and then place over the wound a thin slice of table salt according to the size of the spoonful, or somewhat more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	More if you leave the slice concave in some part of the spoon, then equalize that concavity with stop parsley, and then place the slice according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen over the area with a well-made ligature and ensure that the slice is firmly in place without being displaced from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the string in each day; and every time that it is softened, tie it again tightly and equally if it has been displaced from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And fix the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the string, and know for sure that it belongs to the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the bone to the ligament, then cut over it, and clamp it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends move and tend to become cicatrized and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And concerning the accidents when his thigh is broken it declines to the inner parts and happens great pain, difficulty in walking, cough, fever and much vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the patient is that he be laid supine on the surgeon's lap, and a cushion is placed between the patient's shoulders; then press on the muscles of the patient, adjust the patient's back against the major bones of the spine, and handle with subtlety in the operation and equate according to every manner that is possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place over the plaster and padding, and place above the thin table of willow or caligine and like them in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; then handle with subtlety that over the broken bone so it is not rough; and wind it around the back several times, and strengthen it with a decent tension; and consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes the death of that part due to corruption or puncture, or pain, or abscess that occurred in the place, then you cut and separate that part and eradicate the plaster and correct what occurred by this method of healing; then return the plaster, if you find it fit for that face; and adjust the structure between which it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs affects only large areas that connect them in pairs; and at the extremities of their front part, no contact occurs except by those parts which are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling of the inquiry into it by words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your hands according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the interior parts, then it happens that severe pain and puncture occur in the patient, just as pain occurs in one who has pleurisy, and for this reason let him have a veil placed; and it causes him difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And according to them: place the patient on a soft bed that causes inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the exterior parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we advise this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle inadvertently; and if it does happen, then help the patient.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed above the abdomen and near where it is strong; and this seems reasonable, but it is feared that the abdomen might draw the superfluities to that place due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them would say: cover the area with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, making sure the dressing is equal when you wrap it according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a pleursy diet and medical treatment.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the pain is intense and the patient cannot tolerate it, and you puncture the skin with a lancet, be careful about the patient, then cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which will conserve the chip, the memory of which precedes, and carefully incise the bone, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in diluted oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And may he be laid on his back on the one on which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	For the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, when there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and then apply friction, similar to that of the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider whether their veins are already softened, numbed, and dead, unable to increase or extend or strengthen those areas. When you compress them with your hands or prick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you know that they are not healing, and under such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in these areas when you compress them with your hands and prick them, then you know that the vertebra of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck closely and want to know if they are healthy or not, then examine his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you see that they are already softened, attend to what happens in the bowels, and when it is close to their anus, show windiness and desire for urination, and sometimes they are supine on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and then do not trouble with the cure of them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no such causes occur, the cause is better and milder.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for them is that you should cauterize to induce sedation of the abscess. Place the cautery on the lumbar vertebra or slightly rubbed spine; place it over that area for some days each day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and apply it over that area. Order the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you find that the joint is dislocated or due to some cause that has separated from it, then you should treat the joint and hold that bone in place; then adjust the two edges of the wound, and suture if it is large; afterwards, apply a reddening ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the end of the femur, then you should insert your left hand's little finger into the buttock, and align the broken thigh bone with your other hand as much as possible for second-order reduction; then place a compress and bandage over it if needed, and firmly hold it in place.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel dislocated joints in it, then treat that joint, set it in place, and cure the wound with the treatment that follows until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and they split lengthwise and decline inward; pain occurs in the area and there is puncture, and the leg becomes numbed when it fractures.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is at the fracture where its shape is.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you equalize it according to what appears to you by equilibrium, placing it so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the middle or already declining towards the parts, then you lay the limb on its side with its abdomen prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, apply a plaster over it, and place a wick or stick astelia over that area, and bind it tightly so that you fear neither the puncture of the fracture nor the removal of the stick.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the cavity with what fills it so that it takes the binding according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and apply something to soothe it as previously instructed; and then return to its restoration, and bind it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if accidents occur in the bones or are fractured, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of theadjuctor.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the codex and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one you should use a rod of rough wood according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And attach two strings at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a cushion; and then hang out his broken arm on the rod until it reaches the nodal point of which the curvature of the rod is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And place it suspended above something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor hold the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another way is that the patient be supine on his neck and suspend the neck with a liament; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest of him; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the area above the fracture with one liament and another liament at the other place, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle of the liament over the tendon and let the other end be at the fracture to hold it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the liament at that location and over the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess occurs on the fifth day, then leave the string in place, place a pad of wool soaked in wine and olive oil under it, and when the abscess relaxes, then remove that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The manner of removing it is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the poultice; then adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and firmly hold the arm on this support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause of the broken bone prevents you from doing so.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stays (or splints).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you place that stay over the fracture which is both wider and stronger than the other stays; and between each stay, you leave the width of a digit, and the length of the stays according to the breakage plus the width of three digits in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then firmly hold the stays with the string which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your pressure on the place of the fracture should be more straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, make the pressure less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you place the position of the bones and apply pressure as we have said when restoring the member to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, wait, then leave the pressure and bones in place as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no infection or inflammation occurs; or is forbidden food to reach the member due to the excess of pressure; and so correct all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the bandage for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place yourself over the assistant who is holding a woolen blanket, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be altered nor the ligament softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually strengthens; then cover to thicken the food with it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days after, it is customary for the assistant and the belt to be strengthened for 10 days; then cover to make them loose, and apply baths and ointments which correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been irritated, then do not make them loose of the ligament and the stitches for 10 days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; the former is small, and is that which extends from the thumb side, while the latter is large and is placed next to the small one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the large or small fire stick is broken forcefully, and you must break them together forcefully.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small fire stick is broken above, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing of it is even lighter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fire stick is broken, I leave the fracture to be bad, and the healing of it to be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two common bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	And so, if the bone that is broken is the small fire stick above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration of it, allowing a small extension with facilitation until that which is broken is equalized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large fire stick is what is broken, then you must allow greater extension more vigorously.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both fire sticks are broken together, then you must allow greater extension more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place the figure of your hand for the restoration and extension of it on a cushion, with the wrist of the hand above, more so than all others, and the auricular finger below the other fingers, and the thigh be placed over a sloping bench.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at their head or side, so that the patient does not further strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a cushion, and another minister extends it over similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor aligns the bone within the joint according to the best shape it can be placed in.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must force to reduce all pieces to their place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separated fragment that cannot be reduced to your satisfaction in the restoration of the bone, then you set it as best you can according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	More if the fracture is comminuted, I have dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your reduction, then you line a cloth with rosin oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness. Place the cloth firmly over the area with a subtle constriction to allow the abscess to drain; then remove the wax and apply an ointment prepared from powder of molybdenum and honey, and cover it with a bandage; let the bandage be placed on that fracture, slightly aside and more strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the bones in the arm I saw in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one joint or in two joints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and the stronger the compression on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts, place the compression a little more gentle according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moist but not hard or rough, and the fat of the liver which is strengthened should be of refined meat between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as you anticipate what may happen to the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that anticipation ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb not compressed until it rests, and then remove the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is healed and resembles those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until nutrition flows to it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then it is not necessary for it to be let loose within about ten days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the hand of the patient with its virtue of movement-agitating substances, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or more thoroughly in twenty-eight days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complexions and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the tip of the hand and the joints of the fingers there must be tenderness on palpation, and do not damage them but rub with visible motas.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is damage to the hand or tearing, then make sure the patient stays lying down and in front of the limb for one hundred seconds according to equality, and place your hand over the extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those between which there should be good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then place plaster and bandage, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; and then place salt over according to the size of the area, and you have now wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the tear is within the parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a hollow in the cloth, and command the patient to hold that with his torn palm; and then hold it tightly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the salt be placed on cloth that is soft, so that the salt is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the bone above the stele and another piece from the part in the palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as you turn your hand like a wheel between the fingers with lint.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the finger, then if it is the base of the digit, equalize it according to where it is and then strengthen it with the palm. If you wish, place a small splint on the right side so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, then equalize and bind it to the finger where that bone is; or bind all of them according to continuity, which is better; or place a small stele over it, as we said for the base of the digit.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cauterization and opposition—during your operation—according to where it is when any cause from those occurs, as per the repeated narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the iliac bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The iliac bone, when fractured, is felt according to where it is displaced anteriorly and posteriorly.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their belly and facing downward.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the physician extends the ligament along its proper side according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the base of the iliac bone, then the ligament should be extended along the outer side of the pubic bone, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the pubic bone, then the ligament should be extended along the pubic bone, and the extension to the sides below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural shape, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to affect the limb with an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for a few days until the abscess can be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: make sure to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the sole and the heel of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of linen between the thigh and the leg near the knee, so that the ends of the linen extend above both parts, and then wrap this around the leg and thigh with any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place something over the thigh at the site of the fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the void between the waist and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The farther you are from the site of the fracture, the less tight your bandage should be, and it should be lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the foot's cavity, and tightly secure both ends of the crosspieces of the other part so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the bandage over it so that it is secure and does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation. If any of these conditions occur, you should treat them accordingly and correct whatever has happened as soon as possible, as we have previously described.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More specifically, if the bone is severely damaged, you should try to set it as accurately as possible; if not, apply a splint and secure it, and treat the area from which the memory of the injury was recalled until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the hip is reinforced with strapping or that they fit well to the ilium, as we said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But more so in the restoration of the leg in such a manner, no limp occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or that the other leg is applied, then it is necessary for the other to limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the hip is reinforced in about ten days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs more frequently, but it often takes many weeks to heal.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or there is damage to its parts, and this is either one crack or several cracks, and above all, it is essential to feel the extent.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized that which is broken from the parts of it by the fingers into which it is added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, facilitation, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place the plaster and hold over that round patch, if you need it; strengthen above at the structure to that which is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses, cauterization, and appearance to those that arise when one opposes them to any accident at what is suitable until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the waist.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the waist there are two bones, of which one is large and is named after the waist; and the other is thin and is named flexible.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of the species of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm occur here, and for this, the restoration of it is made just as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint becomes dislocated in front directions.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find that mark, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons according to this equal manner.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But more importantly, if the joint fracture is slight with visible marks, let the extension be less and更为轻柔，以你的力量加以缓解。
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, when you equalize the stars and complete all of your operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are fixed in soles, and make them thusly from palm branches; leave some of those with little coarseness, but not of the thicker ones, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and the thickness between them.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the middle of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be close to the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place the two legs in three positions of both extremities and in the middle position, for in this structure the leg is forbidden to lean towards the right or left side, and must be well positioned.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then apply a brace of wood according to the length of the leg; and place the brace there so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg every day and study it carefully, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then immediately treat it according to what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot occur rarely, and when they do, they are not treated by fracturing them but are rubbed in the appropriate manner.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as shown.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated beneath those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and cover it with a cloth. Place the patient's foot on a small table with two pillows under it.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then firmly hold the foot in a proper position, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes mentioned.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are broken or shattered or displaced, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some bones are said to be broken, then restore those, and set them as I and have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the fractured finger steadily according to its length, and slightly bend it; then lay the hand on this table which you have already prepared, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each fractured finger individually, wrapping a quantity of it in lion skin, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and standing on one of the table's ends, pierce the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is advisable for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause at every occurrence as appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis and the groin of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, make that correction in a curved position, and then slightly incline it towards the upper part of the leg by a little, and keep it stable behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and this should be done in the thigh as desired; and then the woman is stimulated, and gradually raises her leg a little by little, for all of this must be done before the upper part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; and then let her urinate, return to that position according to the method in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to its original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the wound in the thigh; and insert all the bladder into the wound, and then blow through the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have advised, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or a woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have advised for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that occur rarely, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you in the major disposals via recta in the restoration and in the constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of a man's thigh when broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place a bandage around it, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are dislocated.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to apply this to that upon which you are acting with a fracture that is dislocated, and especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the femur, or similar to it. You should warm and bloodlet that frequently if the conditions for bloodletting are present as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the dislocation exudes pus, then you should apply your warm compress with the intention of retaining it and sprinkle it with dried myrrh powder, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that first day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	More so if an abscess does occur, then you should allow the restoration to continue for nine days until the abscess is healed, and do not approach it on the seventh and tenth days, for then you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes over the knee joint, then you must perforate to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with as little movement and extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension and reduction with your hands are not readily possible, then you must reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; for this reason, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small gauge so that it does not bend, holding it over the area during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and let the bottom be relatively thick, and the middle parts thinner.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And named in Greek "labre volontz atelarem", so is palette pاوکا.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	To ensure that the extremity of the patient is raised above the end of the thigh bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And gently push it in one movement so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not fit the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part with the knife which suits it best from those we have mentioned; or let it be one of the blades in some manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And quickly remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the os is reduced, and shortly after the reduction the patient finds great pain, then you know that the os has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have agreed with the patient for great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the os is completed, and then you immerse a cloth in vinegar stained black, and precisely in summer, and do not pause over the sore or any other cause which is oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption occurs.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon after the restoration of the os, and leave the sore uncovered to see if it improves, using forceps and applying dressings according to the quantity of the sore.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful always that you do not aggravate the sore with the fracture, for many times doctors have made this mistake and caused death or severe illness by their improper treatment. Thus it is wise.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the moon's influence is slight, moist, different from the influence of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is great or it is a bad swelling, and you fear certain bad accidents which we have recounted, and you find pain in that place, then do not place your hand there, but make instead a wrapping of hard cloth around that area and strengthen it with stakes.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the swelling begins to appear after one or two days, where it has generated a boil, then lift that from under the cloth which you had placed over it, and apply cold, with which according to our custom we treat swellings, thus with tetrafarmaceutical ointment and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the bandage and consider the swelling at noon and evening each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that suppuration flows from it to the parts you leave facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the swelling persists for many days and is neither consolidated nor abscessed by the boil, then you should suspect that this is a case of small swellings, and you should examine the swelling with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those stages that are separated remain and are extracted, those that from them do not separate and put the member and cause pain, forcefully you have to extract those according to what is possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens to the thigh or calf, they are stiomenios, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place each one of them in what is convenient for the cure of which there is a previous narration in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which it is necessary for you to stay the main speech and make your presence felt: when the bone is fractured, you must examine the member as if it were the thigh and the helper's, resembling those of large members, and do not presume any penetration or extraction due to this leading to death; having left it there where it can remain, for strong bones will fall in by themselves within about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and otherwise leave it there.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of a swelling that occurs in the place of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Blistering occurs in this swelling in the place of the fracture healing, especially near the joints, and changes the shape of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have a styptic effect, such as aloes, resin, myrrh, saffron, and similar; try which of them you take from these or all of them, and confirm whether they are virgins (i.e., pure) styptics, or white of egg, or virgins in oil, and place those on the swelling in a cloth, and bind them over it with good binding.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the extraction not be removed for many days; and then remove it and apply another, until the swelling is reduced. Or strengthen over that lead strip, as lead has the property of reducing whatever is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned to a hard lump and is firm, and necessity demands to remove it completely, then cut through it at its most convenient part, and incise the excess and prominence, or let some of it drain by lancing within until it is reduced. Cure that area once it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol xxI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of a fracture when the member is restored and then placed under the appropriate ligament or tendon according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the delicate member or tendon is placed under the appropriate ligament, this is done for certain causes: of which one is the excess of solution of the ligament and the joining made not according to its nature; or due to an excessive constriction of the ligaments within which the nutrition cannot freely flow to the member; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or due to insufficient healing in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to weaken the patient and make his heart tender while the healing multiplies within him; administer baths; and insert courage and joy into him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a bandage over the member, so that the bandage draws nourishment to it, or continue ointment application with water of Thebes, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously, and prohibit the operation of them that comes from within.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb has been reduced near its healing from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and knuckle, and is due to the deformity of the limb itself, more importantly, the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, so do not let it come to you that someone believes that limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	More importantly, there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reprehensible for leading to great fear of the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	More importantly, if claudication and knuckle are recent, then it should be immersed in water of mule urine in which herbs mollifying are placed, such as wormwood, rue, melilot, and similar; and let them be covered with a poultice of well-prepared dyllaquilon; or they may be coated with a mucilage of rue and mixed with gualina gray or camphor oil, and then applied with that; or they may be coated with fat figs treated with goose feather poultices, and similar to those in the medicines named for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction, especially with the more moist ones, and by administering movement to the limb at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already gone on for some time and is strong, converted into a stone, and provoked, it is necessary to treat it. Therefore, incise above the cecum and let the continuation of the bone be dissolved and incised, administering incisions with sharp instruments where superfluous nodulation of that membrane around the bone with sharp incisors, and let facilitation be administered in that area which has been incised and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Speech Regarding Dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an abnormal position of one of the joints in the body, rendering it motionless and altering the figure of the limb, causing severe pain and significant injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act promptly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the joint will become septic and more difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be cut nor stretched during the hour of the aposteme, because moments after it causes spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you should perform a femoral incision on the thigh, and allow the aposteme to rest inside; then apply cold water and oil to the affected area, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each affected member should be treated with water, the memory of which will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without damage; the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully displaced, at which point they should be softened at the joint where saliva from the throat flows, so that neither can have that nor can close its mouth, and the tongue should be wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it usually returns by itself in major positions.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then it must be administered a slight reduction, and should not be delayed entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts one of his fingers from the side of the mouth into the gap of the dislocated jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and keep the other fingers outside to support them. The doctor then commands the patient to stop moving his jaw and allows it to return to its place; the doctor then aligns the jaw and closes it gently until it returns to its position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a slight reduction of both, and do not delay the complete reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the hernia is closed and not mollified, then place over those powder of cloth mixed with cerot, made of wax and rubbed oil; and further let it be tied with many ligaments.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient with the hernia lie on his back, and his head be placed between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to vomit for any cause; having his food consisting of bread, when the pains are relieved and the jaws are moistened, then let him vomit what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered freely, and you should not interfere with the intake of food and drink until the jaw is moistened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then movements or manipulations will cause fevers and frequent swelling. And the abdomen of the patient is greatly swollen and suffers from pure bile vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, customarily consider it a fatal condition; many die for whom this occurs in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated inside the sternum due to its connection at the feet; sometimes it is dislocated at the front part, and this is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient grasps his own shoulders and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And place your palm on the area firmly to compress it, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand on the area, apply ointment and powder to it, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More often, the extremity that is attached to it remains connected and is not dislocated in any day; therefore, you must reduce and align it according to what we have said and according to what is within your means.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place yourself over the plaster, powder, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And this method of cure is to reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called "tart"; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most commonly dislocated and pushed outward at the back parts of the tendon where the flesh is scanty. It is slightly dislocated in those parts where there are more muscles, but with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to some men through percussion or impact, and the muscle of him is abscessed from a carbuncle, and is cut by this that already be dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then touch where you were especially concerned with it, and then proceed in the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when at the joints you must tremble; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, which you find in manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity, and by trembling you must touch the head of the muscle as if with a hammer, and to the patient it cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor raise it through all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must touch the foot or ankle, and then you find a clear tremor, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still painful.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; then places the tied feet, letting them dangle, and raises the joint with strength in its place, and the minister raises his hand and extends it there; then places it so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, it does not return for what we have said, and the dislocation occurs from the beginning, over many days, then it should be bathed in cold water and treated with a moistening and liniment as if it were roots of acanthus, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And place the foot on its sole and let it dangle until the cold equalizes between levitation and stiffness. Then the doctor places his hand on the lever, elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient so that it is not twisted at the parts below. Another minister holds the head of the patient to prevent it from being twisted at the parts below, for it will return to its place quickly.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the other in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who be longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that limb, and interpose his muscle between the vibration of the patient and elevate the vibration of him into the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pull the hand of the patient from the sides beyond his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then consider that another cause may be suspended, so as not to overlook this, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if it is returned by another method: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with its head in a round shape, like the handle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and placed near the patient; then you cover its head with lion skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole. And extend his hand towards the parts beyond. Extend the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: you should take a rod of which the length be two cubits, and the breadth of it be four fingers, and the thickness thereof be enlarged in the middle according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And above the round head place lion's skin cloth so that the rod does not scratch the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head on the cloth, and extend your hand or arm under the rod between the parts left, and cover the rod with the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its breadth, and the hand extended under the parts left, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for it is completed in any manner that is possible to you, then place under the head a pillow of wool of equal quantity; and then apply an ointment prepared from powder of wormwood and honey over all the muscle, so as to be well mixed on top, and then tightly bind the head with suitable bandages; the ointment should be applied over the ointment, and the hand thereof should be attached to its neck, and let it be, without moving the hand thereof for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient is comfortable with food withheld until the limb is comforted, for it is easier for the recovery of the limb.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And soon after, give the patient more food seven or five times and exercise some movement; and therefore, if it is closed and not mollified, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to small changes caused by humidity or another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in three passes as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is released but the joint is not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it several times but still not closed, and cataplasms are applied but cannot raise that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle at the head of the muscle are either cut or extended or mollified, and you should know that the joint will never be set in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should move the foot and the calf or the parts behind, reducing it by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be applied to the other structure, and care should be taken that it is cured.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the swelling subsides and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation of the shoulder is not easily masked; whether you see it quickly or feel it by touch depending on the shape that is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or allow the hand to reach its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And observe the shoulder blade, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a carbuncle, for if it does come to a carbuncle, reduction is difficult, and even with strong force, it may not be completely healed. Especially when it is in the rear part, for it is more harmful than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain, and often leads to death through warm baths.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the patient, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient be extended between two others, and the arm of the patient be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on the shoulders and let go of the patient, and push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, return it thus by bending the hand towards its own palm, between striking the shoulder with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers extend the arm, and have these two ministers hold it in place so that it is not forced too much during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint by facilitating its movement; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity, place it over the stuffed material in which there is a constriction and evacuation of white bile, and let it be kept in a hanging position, and leave it for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then release it; and if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is hanging; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Moreover, if accidents happen to it shortly after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, so as to be a matter of fatty movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then dry it, and put that in the bath; when it is soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then apply it over that for a while, so as to be a matter of fatty movement, once, and the second, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit. I am preparing for a bath, waiting until it is warm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and cracked crack in the wall and strongly rub it; do this several times, for that is wet and you are returning it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol. xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, it is more important that there be speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The doctor then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, and gently push it back into its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But importantly, it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the patient's abdomen, then the patient's hands should be laid out and reduced; and if dislocation is present, place both hands, ensuring the position of the hand precisely on the table so that the doctor's hand falls over that vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, strengthen that and drain the abscess, leaving that; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor permitted to proceed with the reduction thereafter.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But importantly, the joint should be manipulated according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather have your hand softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are compressed or stretched, and then there is no need in it but to cauterize near the site of injury and fortify it with some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the abscess has returned, place it over the drained area, which we have previously treated, and let it be strengthened for five days; then, return it to its position, leave it there, and exercise the limb.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the motion in it has been obstructed and occurs with some gravity, then apply that which is cold and with friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, dislocate the fingers completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its middle part, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to that procedure, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as if you do this, even if dislocated in the hand, bind that to that part and do with this your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as if you do this when dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the cervical spine.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an entire vertebra of the back or neck is dislocated and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their original positions, then there is no cure, for death ensues to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against his will, and he cannot retain it; several times muscles of the body or legs or arms or one of those are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple times a vertebra is displaced and multiple times the removal of those is done in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is relieved at the rear parts and is named yellowness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider if the yellowness is due to puerperium, then in that case there is no cure and neither does it heal completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those cases which come from conception or percussion or resemblance to those, the Ancients have already detailed the ways of cure in much discourse, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I will now abbreviate what is of little excess of the tropes, by my proximity to your understanding exposition, to which I have here expanded and formed from various instruments, with which I shall show and expound that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in yellowness that occurs at the front of the foot, neither is it generated nor does it heal from that; similarly in that which arises between two toes.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs properly at the foot is cured as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be extended on his back close to the wall, and laid out so that his feet are well moistened to prevent them from drying.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, set in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across the feet at the other end of the beam.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and tie the lion's hide tightly. Extend the end of the hide to the stick which is fixed at the head of the patient, and attach it there; and tighten the other hide over the hips of the patient with the nails, and fix the legs of the patient; and adjust all the hides tightly and attach them to the other stick which is fixed at the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the hide to the part of the stick, and do not remove both sticks and the hides in which they are inserted, but rather keep them fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia, and dig into the wall where we said was near the patient a place between the ends of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the majority of the table's length on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses firmly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a vein which is pulsating in the hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of one stick, whose length is that of a braccio, and place his head at the heel of another stick; and let the distance be such that the space between each stick is a palm. Then draw blood from both sticks, and secure each stick firmly to the ground so they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round stick for the thigh, and it should be rotated in the two cuts of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a stick on which the round stick is formed, the length of which is one palm in relation to what is rotated; and in the two other sticks, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched on the foot with the stick on which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched on the thighs with the thigh where you place its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each thigh and have a minister twist the thigh with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the thigh:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a piece of cloth over the paste, the width of which should be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length enough to cover the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the substance we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger at the site at the end of the healing, then it is advisable to administer medicines that mitigate and relieve through continuous use as recommended on the table; and a lead plate has already been administered in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes accidents occur at the end of the vertebrae, and it is seized by that dislocation; and it is that bone where you already anticipate that no suspicion should be caused to it with this medicine, for it will greatly happen to cause your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Capitulum XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only due to dislocation, and not what occurs in other joints due to slight movement and depression.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the hip is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is primarily dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, the former appears longer and the latter more prominent. The affected side cannot bend its foot; it must be lengthened. This is the location where a cautery should be applied to cauterize the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is effectively treated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of those affected with dislocation to the external parts is that their symptoms are contrary to this condition.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of dislocation to the anterior parts is that you expand the leg in proper proportion, but it cannot bend at the ankle. If forced to bend further, it causes pain. The urine from this side is retained, and the swelling is an apostema. You should treat its mobility over the tibia.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of those who suffer dislocation in the rear parts is that they do not expand the buttocks, nor can that which should bend forward bend it backward, and the waist is shorter than the other, and the buttock is soft at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction in the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old and already degenerated, that it has been there for some time. Then, according to its disposition, you perform a reduction on it as needed; but then there should be no presumption made in that treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four species of dislocation, you should manipulate it so that you reduce the joint and extend it to both internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left sides, for it will strongly return on its own without requiring further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong medicine and extend the waist on the side more affected, or on their hands, or apply liniment which is rubbed on the waist above the buttocks; another medicine should extend the hand from above so that it touches the inner sides of their legs; then strongly apply liniment on the back of the thigh, and have another person hold the end of the liniment.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is the extension from the loins or from inside the iliac part to the axillary part, or from behind to the lumbar part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in one go, lifting the patient's body from the ground and letting them hang pendulously.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, ensure that the patient's body is supine on their left side; then place the bandages around the hip in that location where between the head of the hip and the location where the iliac part is placed. Additionally, extend the bandage from above the area of the axilla to the next part of the ilium.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly grasp the thighs of the patient, and compress the large area of the affected hip, extending it outward forcefully; for this will cause the dislocation to return to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of a milder cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if it is excused upon you and you do not comply with the training for this species of cure, then cover that patient's two feet together with firm but gentle bandaging, over both the ankles and both the insteps.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient's leg should be悬挂于杆子的顶部，且应置于手中；其长度应为两臂长。
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to hold down the thigh, and have another strong youth suspend the patient's leg, with the other youth holding down the thigh firmly, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction proper, when dislocation is at the outward part, cover the patient's leg with a cloth according to what we have advised when he was brought in; and strengthen the bandaging over the patient's leg and its ankle.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And nearby two rods be placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and nearby those rods adjust them firmly over the middle of the patient's thigh, upon which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the rod is between their thighs, for you should allow the extension to the parts left undone.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand diligently over it, as we said in equalization for it.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May the patient lie quietly on their side.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then let the leg be extended slightly, and this is according to this narrative method for the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patella of the diseased knee, and nearby tightens the other hand, and with that tightening place the extension at the part left to the kneecap.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not allow the patient to be stretched out on his back and elevated above the ground; instead, he should be placed on a hard surface, as we said when the wider part was dislocated towards the outer side, according to what we have said about the lying down of the patient on two widths; and his face and limbs should be extended, as we said.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And a compress should be applied on the place where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, once the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is when you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the leg returns to its normal position by expanding that part, then you know that the limb has been returned according to what is required — then you place both pillows and apply bandages so that the width does not change in any part; and you keep the leg at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then separate the legs and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see equal marks in the wound, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a poultice to that area, and reposition it according to your original structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then move that area to gradually improve mobility in each part over some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the front parts more than to the back parts; and it is not dislocated to the rear parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their thigh to their chest; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of the patient is that you make sure the thigh is straight, try to extend its leg as much as possible over this; attach your two hands to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure the sole adheres to your palms, retain those between your toes on the sole of it with strength, and another attendant stretch his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of relief for the patient is that his leg adheres to the thigh lightly without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and place those continuously with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the splint for ambulation for some days until it is healed and conforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip, a previous narration was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol. xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the foot.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The foot is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated by force, and the dislocation of the foot is done either internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the foot is that you see the foot swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the cure of the reduction of the foot is by gentle restoration, and it is that it be extended with ease and equalized so that it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the cure of the foot when it is dislocated by force, make sure you straighten the limb properly, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the injured part in the middle of that area.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the foot of the upper part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot, placing your hand in the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, and then extend your left hand; and push the foot to the right with the leg bent on the left.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot to the leg for the third time, and you are at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two pushes using this method, and if you grasp the foot evenly, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, as it may not return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have advised, then place the foot in a basin on the ground, and insert a wooden stick into the ground firmly, and let it sit between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth to prevent it from moving.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with a stick placed on the back of the foot; and then each minister extends against the length of their part, and the wooden stick remains between the patient's thighs holding it there, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides you release its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you, then pause and apply a strong paste externally there, and bind the foot with linen to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be sure to avoid or guard against the nerves behind the talus, lest the linen over that area be too strong and severely affect those nerves.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that alone for two or three days; and if the linen becomes moist, apply it externally.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove the linen on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary for the patient to go before that time, be sure that the dislocation is not completely dissolved and destroyed, and that it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs in him, then cover the place where you administer as we described in our narrative in another location for healing and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol.xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that which is dislocated so that it is gently extended a little; what is not difficult, beforehand is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	More if the dislocation is in some joints of the big toe, then cover that you place the foot on a level part of the ground or on a table, and let it be thus as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on your foot, and place your foot over the area near the joints, and press that part with your foot to apply pressure until it returns, and observe that which is gently extended and does not appear as a prominence in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the abdomen of his foot on a table that can hold his entire foot, which has two supports, and firmly strengthen it with a stable structure for three days; then loosen it and allow him to rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that occur from a blow or from a fracture or any other combination.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, mistakes can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it, but only someone who is skilled in the art, long practiced, merciful, and pious; who delays, is not rash, nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that can reduce abscesses by cautery alone, leaving the disease to divine judgment, rather than to him to which you hope for recovery from illness, in alleviation of the disease, and in which any hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, administer a regimen that reduces the abscess by cautery and treats the blow with what is suitable for it from the drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation or fracture occurs in the separated bones of the thigh, then you must reduce their displacement, and do so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these in the places mentioned above.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true soul those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless.
Amen.	Amen.
